1. Happy Fun Books
Do not taunt Happy Fun Ball. 
—“Saturday Night Live”, February 1991
Welcome aboard! It’s your first day as a Go developer at Happy Fun
Books, a publisher and distributor of books for people who like cheerful
reading in gloomy times. I’m so glad you could join us, because we have a
very important job for you: you’ll be helping to build our new online
bookstore using Go.
Hello, world
Don’t worry if that sounds a bit intimidating: we’ll start from scratch, and
work our way up in easy stages. Actually, that’s what experienced
programmers do, too, if they’re wise.
In other words, we don’t start by trying to build something complicated like
an e-commerce system. That’s much too difficult. Instead, we start with the
simplest thing we can imagine, and get that working first. Then we add a
tiny increment to it that gets us a little bit closer to what we need to end up
with.Our first program
Let’s start with about the simplest program imaginable: one that prints a
message. If we can write, run, and understand that program, we’ll have
covered a lot of useful ground already.
Here’s the program:
(Listing hello/1)
Traditionally, the message we print when we write our first program in any
language is “Hello, world”. Seems appropriate, doesn’t it? And you can see
this text in the program code. Don’t worry about the other stuff for the
moment: let’s run the program first, then analyse how it works.
Make a new folder on your computer—it doesn’t matter where—and use
your text editor to create a file named main.go. Copy the example program
to this file and save it.
Now open your terminal application in this folder and run the following
command:
go run main.go
If all goes well, you should see a friendly message:
Hello, world
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Hello, world") 
}Packages
Now let’s take a closer look at the program that produces this message.
How does it work?
Every Go source file begins with a package clause, like this one:
All Go code, it turns out, belongs to some package. A “package”, in Go’s
terms, is nothing more than a way of grouping related bits of code together,
so that they can be used as a single unit.
You can name your packages whatever you like, in general, but the name 
main is special. When you compile the main package, an executable program
is produced (and that’s what we want here).
Imports
As we’ve just seen, a Go program must have at least a main package, but if
you want to use other packages, you’re welcome. All you need to do is add
an import declaration like this, naming the extra package you want to use:
We’ll see what fmt does in a moment, but for now, this line does nothing at
all but declare some information about the program: it’s going to use the 
fmt package at some future point.
Functions
Here’s another declaration. It’s telling Go about a new function that we’re
defining:
package main
import "fmt"
func main() {The func keyword, followed by a name (in this case main), declares a new
function. What’s a function?
Declaring a function
Just like a package, a function is a way of organising your code into a little
unit and giving it a name. A single program can contain many packages,
and each of those packages can contain many functions.
And, just as the main package is special, because it’s the package that
imports all others, the main function is special too. It’s where the execution
of your program will actually start, so it’s the function that calls all others,
if there are any others.
Notice that this line ends with an opening curly brace, {. That means “Here
comes the function body”.
Go considers everything following the opening curly brace to be part of the
body of the function we’re defining, until it sees a corresponding closing
brace, which ends the function definition.
Calling a function
Our main function body is nice and simple, consisting of this single line:
This is a statement. Whereas a declaration (such as the import declaration
we just saw) gives Go some descriptive information about our program
(“We’re going to use the fmt package”), a statement tells Go to do
something: “Print this message!”, for example.
func main() {
fmt.Println("Hello, world")To call a function, we write its name, prefixed by the name of the package it
belongs to (fmt.Println), and followed by a list of arguments in
parentheses (“Hello, world”).
fmt, which Go programmers usually pronounce as “fumpt”, deals with
formatting text in various ways, including printing it to the terminal. And
the specific function we’re using here is Println, which is short for “print
line”. It prints whatever message we give it:
Hello, world
If we’d written a different message here, then that message would be
printed instead when the program runs. Try changing the message, running
the program again with go run main.go, and seeing what happens.
We’ve already learned quite a bit from even this fairly short program: how
to declare a package, how to import other packages, how to define a
function, how to call a function, and how to pass arguments to it. We also
learned one way to print things, which is handy.
A challenge
Now here’s your first code challenge: to extend this program in an
interesting way, using what you’ve just learned.
Creating a hello function
GOAL: Modify this program to add a declaration for a new function named
hello. Your function should print the same “Hello, world” message that
we’ve just seen. Modify the main function so that, instead of calling 
fmt.Println to print the message, it calls your new hello function. Check
the result by running the go run main.go command again.
If you’re not sure what to do, or you’d like a hint, read on.HINT: Let’s start with how to declare our new hello function. You know
that the func keyword introduces a new function, and you’ve seen how it’s
used to declare main. Use it in exactly the same way to declare your hello
function. Can you see what to do?
Inside the curly braces marking the body of the hello function, we need
some code that prints the “Hello, world” message. Well, you already know
how to do that: the exact same way that main does it.
Finally, you need to modify the existing main function so that it calls hello
instead of fmt.Println. And you know that you call a function by writing
its name, followed by parentheses (if there are no arguments, then you don’t
need to put anything between the parentheses, but they still need to be
there).
If that function is in a different package, like fmt, then we need to use that
package name as a prefix to the function call, but that’s not the case here.
When the function we’re calling is in the “current” package—the one we’re
in right now—then we can give only its name, without a prefix.
SOLUTION: Well, here’s how I did it. See how it compares to your
version:
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func hello() { 
    fmt.Println("Hello, world") 
} 
 
func main() { 
    hello() 
}(Listing hello/2)
Function ordering
By the way, it doesn’t matter in what order you define your functions: you
don’t have to define the function before you call it. Write your functions in
whatever order you think is most logical for people reading the program. To
me, that usually means putting the most important or commonly-used
functions first, but it’s up to you.
Dealing with data
So, do we have a bookstore yet? Not quite, but we’re on the way. What’s
the least we could do that would still be of some use to the staff of Happy
Fun Books? Well, one thing we could do is, instead of printing “Hello,
world”, we could print a list of books that are in stock. How would we do
that?
Printing a fixed message would be no good here, because Happy Fun Books
has many branches, and the stock at each branch changes frequently. While
the logic of our program (“print all the books”) won’t change, the specific
data it deals with will vary from place to place and time to time.
Values
By “data”, we really mean some piece of information, like the title of a
book, its price, or the address of a customer. These are all data values—bits
of data.
Can we distinguish usefully between different kinds of data? Yes. For
example, some data is in the form of text (a book title, for example). We call
this string data, meaning a sequence of things, like “a string of pearls”, only
in this case it’s a string of letters.
We’ve used a string value already in our “Hello, world” program. It was the
message we passed to fmt.Println:Notice that when this message is printed, it doesn’t include the quote
characters (") at either end. These aren’t part of the string itself: they’re
markers indicating to Go where the string begins and ends.
A piece of data like "Hello, world" is called a value. Suppose our
bookstore is very small, and only has one book in stock at the moment. We
could print its details by writing them as a string value:
(Listing books/1)
If you want to run this program, create a new folder for it, open a new 
main.go file, and copy this code into it. Or edit the “Hello, world” program
we wrote earlier in this chapter, so that it looks like this one. Then use go 
run main.go as you did before.
Notice what’s different about this program. We have two statements in the 
main function now, not one. They’re both function calls, and they both call 
fmt.Println, but with different arguments—different values.
And we said that, while the logic of the program won’t change, the data
might. We probably won’t need to change the “Books in stock:” message,
but we certainly will need to change the second message, about the specific
book we have in stock.
fmt.Println("Hello, world")
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
    fmt.Println("'Master and Commander', by Patrick O'Brian") 
}To make that easier, we’ll store our book information in a variable. Let’s
see how to do that.
Variables
As the name suggests, variables are for storing data that might change (by
contrast, values that don’t change during the running of the program are
called constants).
A variable is a way of giving a name to a data value, so that we can refer to
it by that name later. Just as we declared a new function by using the func
keyword, we can declare a new variable using the var keyword, like this:
You could think of a variable as being like a little box where we can keep
bits of data—values—so they don’t get lost. Each box has a label, so we
know what’s inside. In this case, the label is book, and whenever we use that
name in the rest of the program, Go will open the box and retrieve the value
for us.
For example, we could write:
Notice that this time, there are no quotes around the word book. That’s
because we’re not asking Go to print the string “book”. Instead, we’re
saying “Find the variable named book, and print the value stored inside it.”
Here’s a new version of the program that stores the book information in a
variable:
var book = "'Master and Commander', by Patrick O'Brian"
fmt.Println(book)
package main
 
import "fmt" (Listing books/2)
On the face of it, this doesn’t seem much more useful than what we did
before, which was giving the book information as a quoted string. By the
way, that kind of value is called a literal, as in “It’s literally this string!”
The change we’ve made here is to first assign that literal value to a variable,
and then use the identifier book to refer to that variable later on. The effect
of the program is the same as when we used a literal, but that’s about to
change!
Assigning values to variables
The point about variables is that we can vary them: we can assign a new
value to them, which will replace the old one.
What do you think the following program will print?
 
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
    var book = "'Master and Commander', by Patrick O'Brian" 
    fmt.Println(book) 
}
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
    var book = "'Master and Commander', by Patrick O'Brian" 
    fmt.Println(book) 
    book = "'A Morbid Taste for Bones', by Ellis Peters" (Listing books/3)
Let’s run it with go run main.go and see if you’re right:
Books in stock: 
'Master and Commander', by Patrick O'Brian 
'A Morbid Taste for Bones', by Ellis Peters
A well-stocked bookstore indeed! So, once we’ve created the new variable 
book with our var declaration, we can then give it a new value any time we
like by writing an assignment statement:
Creating your own variables
So, here’s another challenge for you, to help consolidate what you’ve
learned.
GOAL: Write a Go program that creates two string variables, title and 
author, and gives them values: use the title and author of one of your own
favourite books. Print these out. Then set title and author to different
values, corresponding to another book. Print these out too.
HINT: We won’t need any new function this time. The important thing is to
declare our variables and give them their initial values, and you know how
to do that, using the var keyword. You also know how to print them, by
calling fmt.Println and passing it the name of the variable you want to
print.
Then we need to assign new values to both variables, and you’ve seen how
to write an assignment statement to do that. All set?
    fmt.Println(book) 
}
book = "'A Morbid Taste for Bones', by Ellis Peters"SOLUTION: Here’s my version:
(Listing books/4)
I cheated a little bit here, because I didn’t tell you that you can pass multiple
arguments to fmt.Println (or to any function), by separating them with
commas. Well, now you know!
But if you printed title and author with consecutive calls to fmt.Println,
that’s totally fine. This way of doing it saves a bit of typing, that’s all.
Adding a printBook function
Notice that we repeated the exact same line of code here twice:
You might be wondering: could we declare some function that does this
instead, and then call it with different values, like the way we call 
fmt.Println with different values?
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
    var title = "The City & The City" 
    var author = "China Miéville" 
    fmt.Println(title, "by", author) 
    title = "The Sugar Barons" 
    author = "Matthew Parker" 
    fmt.Println(title, "by", author) 
}
fmt.Println(title, "by", author)Certainly we could:
(Listing books/5)
Declaring function parameters
Notice that our new function printBook is slightly different to the hello
function we created earlier. Unlike that previous function, this one declares
parameters—that is, it expects arguments to be passed when it is called.
In this function declaration, we’re telling Go that when we call this
function, we will pass it two values, to which we’ll assign the working
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
    var title = "The City & The City" 
    var author = "China Miéville" 
    printBook(title, author) 
    title = "The Sugar Barons" 
    author = "Matthew Parker" 
    printBook(title, author) 
} 
 
func printBook(title, author string) { 
    fmt.Println(title, "by", author) 
}
func printBook(title, author string)names title and author. Also, both values contain the same kind of data,
namely string.
The parameter names title and author happen to be the same as the ones
we used for the corresponding variables in the main function, but this is a
coincidence. We could have written, for example:
But it makes sense to use the same names for variables that contain the
same data, doesn’t it? And that’s exactly what they are. Inside the 
printBook function, the names title and author are available for us to use
as variables, and they’ll contain whatever was passed to the function at the
place it was called.
Here’s what we know so far
We’ve covered some really important ground in this chapter. You can now
read any Go program and understand what package it belongs to, what other
packages it imports, and what functions it declares.
You know that functions consist of statements, and you know about one
kind of statement, which is a function call. You also know how to pass
arguments to a function (like the message “Hello, world”).
You’ve learned about how to deal with data, such as string values, how to
store data in named boxes called “variables”, how to declare function
parameters, and how to use those parameters in the body of the function.
In the next chapter, let’s extend this knowledge to cover more different
types of data.
func printBook(nameOfBook, personThatWroteIt string)