2. Just my type
In the previous chapter we did some interesting things with string data, but
is that the only kind of data we can use in a program? Certainly not. There
are all sorts of other kinds of data we can work with. For example, numbers.
New data types
A well-stocked bookstore will certainly contain more than one copy of
some books, so perhaps we’d like to keep track of that information, too. As
with the title and author, we could store this in a variable:
You don’t need to type this in, by the way; it’s just an example to illustrate
what I mean.
Numeric data
Notice that there are no quotes around the value 15. That’s because this isn’t
a piece of text: it’s not the string "15", it’s the number 15.
var title = "Killers of the Flower Moon" 
var author = "David Grann" 
var copies = 15Go considers these as two distinct kinds of information: two distinct data
types. The value "David Grann" is a string literal; 15 is called an integer
literal (more about integers in a moment).
If we had a copies variable in our printBook function, we’d be able to
include it when we print out the book information, by writing something
like this:
The output would be, for example:
Killers of the Flower Moon by David Grann - 15 copies
Great! We should be able to cope with any sudden surge in demand for this
excellent book.
Parameter types
Now that we know how useful abstractions are, we’d like to add this new
piece of data to our printBook function. Here’s the current declaration of 
printBook, showing the parameters it can take:
We can add copies to this list of parameters, but we also have to tell Go
what data type it is. It’s not a string, so we can’t say string. What should
we put here?
The int type
In fact, Go has more than one built-in data type for dealing with numbers.
The most commonly used one is called int, short for “integer”. The integers
(Latin for “whole”) are, as you probably know, the whole numbers.
Let’s declare copies as a parameter of type int:
fmt.Println(title, "by", author, "-", copies, "copies")
func printBook(title, author string)(Listing books/6)
Now all we have to do is remember to add the copies information each time
we call printBook in our main function:
(Listing books/6)
We’ve imagined a variable (or, equivalently, a function parameter) as being
like a little box that you put different data values into, and the box has a
name on it (for example, copies). Now we know that the box also has a
label on it identifying what kind of data it can hold: for example, string or 
int.
Variable declarations
Each time we’ve created a new variable, such as title, we declared its
name and assigned its value in a single statement, like this:
func printBook(title, author string, copies int) { 
    fmt.Println(title, "by", author, "-", copies, "copies") 
}
func main() { 
    fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
    var title = "The City & The City" 
    var author = "China Miéville" 
    var copies = 1 
    printBook(title, author, copies) 
    title = "The Sugar Barons" 
    author = "Matthew Parker" 
    copies = 2 
    printBook(title, author, copies) 
}That’s convenient, but we can also declare the variable without explicitly
giving it a value:
Notice that we have to tell Go what type the new variable is here (string).
We didn’t have to say that when we assigned a value, because Go is smart
enough to work out what the type must be, based on that value.
Here, there’s no such clue, so we have to state the type explicitly: string.
Or, if we wanted to declare an integer variable, we’d say int:
Later, we can assign a value to our new variable with an assignment
statement of the kind you’ve already seen:
Zero values and default values
You might have wondered what happens if we declare a new variable using
the var keyword, but then try to refer to it before we’ve actually assigned
any value to it. What happens when we try to print the variable, for
example?
Let’s see:
var title = "The City & The City"
var title string
var copies int
title = "The City & The City" 
copies = 1
var x int 
fmt.Println(x)How interesting! It turns out the variable has a default value, known as the
zero value, which is what it will contain before we explicitly put anything in
it. What that value actually is depends on the type.
To put it another way, when you ask Go for a new box, the box doesn’t
arrive empty. You get a free gift inside it: a copy of the zero value for that
type of box. For int, the zero value is indeed zero, which makes sense, but
what about other types?
The zero value for string is the empty string, "", which also seems
reasonable. Check this for yourself:
No output, but that’s what we’d expect: the string s is empty, so there’s
nothing to print.
By the way, any time you have a question about Go syntax, or what some
snippet of code will do, you don’t have to go through the process of
creating a new project, compiling, and running it on your computer. There’s
an online Go Playground where you can experiment with programs using
just a web browser; you don’t even need to have Go installed. Try it!
Type checking
What’s the point of having types, then? Well, I’m glad you asked.
In theory, we could store all information as strings, but then we could easily
get mixed up between one variable and another. The type system helps
// Output: 
// 0
var s string 
fmt.Println(s)
// Output: 
//catch mistakes like this, because Go provides type checking for us: it won’t
let us assign values of one type to variables of another type, for example.
Type mismatch errors
What happens if we try to put a value of one type into a box that’s defined
to hold a different type? Presumably that won’t work, but let’s see what
happens.
At the risk of making Go angry, we’ll try to put an int value into a string
variable, and vice versa:
As expected, we get some errors on trying to run this program:
cannot use 42 (untyped int constant) as string value in assignment 
cannot use "None" (untyped string constant) as int value in 
assignment
Ignoring the stuff about “untyped constants” for now, this means,
effectively:
cannot put an 'int' value into a box marked 'string' 
cannot put a 'string' value into a box marked 'int'
And that makes sense. Even if we could do this kind of thing, it would be a
bad idea. With data, there’s a place for everything, and everything should be
in its place. If you put salt in the pepper grinder and pepper in the salt
shaker, it will confuse and annoy your dinner guests, and they probably
won’t come again.
A plausible bug
Type checking is useful for when we make genuine mistakes, not just when
we’re playing practical jokes on Go like this. For example, we might forget
title = 42 
copies = "None"the correct order of arguments to the printBook function, and mix them up,
something like this:
This is the sort of bug (mistake) that happens all the time in programming,
so it’s handy that Go can spot it for us and report the problem:
cannot use copies (variable of type int) as string value...
We’re not really trying to use an int as a string value, but Go doesn’t know
that. It can’t say “Hey, you dummy, you got your arguments in the wrong
order,” even though that’s the true source of the problem. But it can at least
report that there must be something amiss.
Structured data
We’re making progress towards our bookstore application. We’ve now
figured out how to store various bits of data about a book in variables, using
the appropriate type for each one: string for the title and author, int for the
number of copies in stock.
We’ll probably need to store several more pieces of data about each book in
the finished program. For example, we might want to know the book’s
ISBN number, publisher, year of publication, and so on. We’d certainly like
to be able to store its price, and perhaps a brief description of its contents,
even a cover image.
That’s a lot of variables for one book! It’s already a little inconvenient to
use a function such as printBook, because we have to pass each variable as
a separate argument: title, copies, author, and perhaps more in the future.
Introducing structs
Ideally, since all these variables relate to a single book, we’d like to be able
to group them together into one variable. Not just that, but we’d like to
printBook(title, copies, author)maintain the structure of that variable: the fact that there’s a string
containing the book’s title, another string containing its author, and an
integer number of copies. Then we could retrieve any of those bits of
information individually when we want them, while still having the
convenience of passing a single value to a function that deals with books.
Fortunately, Go has a kind of data type that works exactly this way. It’s
called a struct (as in “structured data”). Let’s see how to use it.
Declaring a new struct type
We want to create a struct type that stores data about a book, and we can do
that with a type declaration like this:
The type keyword introduces a new type, and the name Book is what we’re
going to call it. Then, the keyword struct tells Go that this is going to be a
structured type, which means the next thing we need to do is list the
individual fields—the variables that make up our book information.
The opening curly brace { prefaces the list of fields, just as it marks the start
of the function body when we’re declaring a new function. Generally in Go,
an opening curly brace means “Here comes some stuff”, and the
corresponding closing brace means “That’s the end of that stuff”:
type Book struct { 
    Title  string 
    Author string 
    Copies int 
}
type Book struct { // here come some fields... 
    Title  string 
    Author string 
    Copies int 
} // ...that's the end of those fieldsWithin the block of code marked by the opening and closing braces, we list
each field, giving its name (for example Title) and the type of data it stores
(for example string). They can all be different types, and there can be as
many fields as we want, but we only need these three for now.
Great, so we created a new struct type named Book, but what now? How do
we actually use it?
Struct variables and values
Well, the first thing we should do is declare a new variable of this type:
Just as we previously declared new variables of type string or int, which
are built-in types, we can use our newly-defined Book type to create a
variable in the same way. Now let’s assign it a value:
Combining declaration and assignment
Again, this assignment statement works exactly like the previous ones
we’ve written: there’s the name of a variable (book) on the left-hand side of
the = sign, and a literal value on the right-hand side. In fact, we could also
have written this in a single step, declaring and assigning in the same
statement:
var book Book
book = Book{ 
    Title:  "Sea Room", 
    Author: "Adam Nicolson", 
    Copies: 2, 
}Notice that we now don’t have to mention the type of variable that book
should be. Go is smart enough to infer it, because the only type of variable
you could assign a Book value to would be a Book variable. Why repeat
yourself if you don’t have to?
It’s so common to combine variable declaration and assignment in Go
programs that we have an even more concise way to write the same thing:
Notice that the var keyword disappeared altogether, and instead of the =
sign (“is assigned the value”), we have the strange-looking := sequence (“is
implicitly declared and assigned the value”). This “colon-equals” syntax is
technically known as the short declaration form, but I’ve also heard it
called the “walrus operator” (try looking at it sideways).
The short declaration form is common in Go code, so we’ll use it instead of 
var from now on.
Struct literals
We know what string and integer literals look like, because we’ve used
them before, but we have something new here: a struct literal. Specifically,
a Book literal:
var book = Book{ 
    Title:  "Sea Room", 
    Author: "Adam Nicolson", 
    Copies: 2, 
}
book := Book{
    Title:  "Sea Room", 
    Author: "Adam Nicolson", 
    Copies: 2, 
}We write that, as you see, by first of all giving the name of the type (Book),
then using an opening curly brace: here comes the stuff. Namely, a list of
elements: that is, individual bits of data.
In a struct literal, each element is a key-value pair: the name of some field
(for example Title), followed by a colon, followed by the value we want to
assign to that field (for example "Sea Room"), and finally a trailing comma.
Perhaps it doesn’t really seem like all this gains us that much. I mean, we
started out with three separate variables, and now we have one variable with
three separate fields. What’s the difference?
The main reason for grouping data values together into a struct is that it
makes them easier to pass around (for example, to a function such as 
printBook). We get the convenience of having the book information in a
single variable, but we also keep the flexibility of being able to access any
of the individual fields by name when we want to:
Accessing struct fields
Notice that we use the name book.Title to refer to this field (pronounced
“book dot Title” when we’re reading out loud).
It’s not enough to say Title alone, because there could be lots of different 
Book variables: which one do we mean? We have to identify the specific
Book{ 
    Title:  "Sea Room", 
    Author: "Adam Nicolson", 
    Copies: 2, 
}
fmt.Println(book.Title) 
// Output: 
// Sea Roombook first of all (book), then the field name prefixed by a period (.Title).
Together, the two things identify a specific field on a specific Book variable.
Similarly, we can assign a new value to a struct field if we want to:
And because a struct is essentially a bunch of variables glued together, we
can use those struct fields anywhere that we could use an individual
variable:
That’s nice, but we can do better! Now that we can treat these pieces of
book data as a single value, we could change our printBook to take one
parameter, instead of three. Can you work out how to do that?
Struct parameters
GOAL: Modify the printBook function so that it takes a single parameter
representing all the information about a specific book. Try out the new
function and make sure it prints the same output as before.
HINT: Well, you know how to declare a variable of type Book, so what
about a function parameter? That works pretty much the same way, it turns
out. See if you can guess what the syntax needs to be.
Once you have that parameter, you refer to its individual fields using the dot
notation we saw in the previous example: first comes the name of the
parameter, then a period, then the name of the field we want.
SOLUTION: Here’s one way we could write printBook:
book.Copies = 1
printBook(book.Title, book.Author, book.Copies)(Listing books/7)
Let’s try it out:
(Listing books/7)
Pretty neat! This not only makes it easier and less verbose to call printBook,
and simplifies the function declaration, it’s also a kind of future-proofing.
As we add more fields to the Book struct in the future, we won’t need to
modify every place in the program where we call printBook; instead, we
need only update the function itself.
Even when we change the details of the Book struct in some way, such as
adding a field, our calling code can stay exactly the same:
func printBook(book Book) { 
    fmt.Println(book.Title, "by", book.Author, "-", book.Copies, 
"copies") 
}
fmt.Println("Books in stock:") 
book := Book{
    Title:  "Sea Room", 
    Author: "Adam Nicolson", 
    Copies: 2, 
} 
printBook(book) 
// Output: 
// Sea Room by Adam Nicolson - 2 copies
printBook(book)The code of printBook will probably need to change, naturally, but that only
occurs in one place, so it’s a lot easier to find and update.
In fact, let’s make a change now, just for fun. The fmt.Println function, as
you probably noticed, prints all its arguments, separated by spaces. This is
fine, but it’s not always easy to see exactly what the result will look like,
especially when there are lots of arguments.
It would be more convenient if we could specify a format string: a kind of
template string containing the literal text we want (“by”, “copies”), but also
placeholders showing where the data value would go.
For example, suppose we used %v as a placeholder for values, we could
write a format string like this:
Now we also need to supply the data, and since there are three %v
placeholders, we need three pieces of data to fill them: book.Title, 
book.Author, and book.Copies.
So, fmt.Println has a companion function that works exactly like this: 
fmt.Printf. It takes a format string, possibly containing placeholders, and
then as many pieces of data as needed to fill the placeholders (if any). Our
example would look like this:
Note that Printf, unlike Println, doesn’t automatically add a newline
character to the end of our string. We can supply one, though, by including
the sequence \n (for “newline”) in the format string.
Formatted printing like this is extremely useful. Since there could be a lot
of data, and the format string could be very long, this is a more flexible and
friendly way of printing than fmt.Println provides.
"%v by %v - %v copies"
fmt.Printf("%v by %v - %v copies\n", book.Title, book.Author, 
book.Copies)Here’s what we know so far
Now you know about some new types, including int, and struct types that
combine different kinds of data into a single record. You’ve learned how to
declare and assign variables in one statement, using the short declaration
form, and you also know how to write functions that take structs as
parameters, and access the data in individual fields.
Great job! In the next chapter, we’ll continue our data-mangling activities,
and in particular we’ll see how to test functions that process data in various
ways.