4. Slicing & dicing
You’ve made a great start on our bookstore project so far, but there’s
something we’re still missing. We can create a single value of the Book type
and assign it to a variable, but a decent bookstore is going to need more
than one book. We don’t yet have a way of dealing with collections of
things (books, for example).
Slices
Just as we grouped a bunch of values of different types together into a
struct, so that we can deal with them as a unit, we would like a way to
group together a bunch of values of the same type. And in Go one kind of
collection of values is called a slice.
Slice variables and literals
For example, a value representing a group of books would be a slice of Book
(that’s how we say it). We can declare a slice variable like this:
var books []BookThis says “Please create a variable named books of type []Book” (the square
brackets indicate a slice).
Once we’ve created such a variable, we can assign something to it. For
example, we can assign a slice literal:
The value on the right-hand side of the assignment is an empty []Book
literal. If we wanted to include some actual books in it, we could do that by
putting some Book literals (each with a trailing comma) inside the curly
braces:
Notice that we don’t need to write the type name Book before each struct
literal inside the slice, because Go knows that only Book values can possibly
be members of a slice of Book.
Indexing slices
books = []Book{}
books = []Book{ 
    { 
        Title:  "Chasing the Thrill", 
        Author: "Daniel Barbarisi", 
    }, 
    { 
        Title:  "Birds and People", 
        Author: "Mark Cocker", 
    }, 
    { 
        Title:  "Most Secret War", 
        Author: "R.V. Jones" 
    } 
}There’s something we can do with a slice that we couldn’t do with a basic
or struct type: we can refer to one of its elements (the values contained in
the slice) using its index (element number):
The index is a non-negative integer that specifies the single element we’re
interested in, where the index of the first element is 0, the second is 1, and
so forth. (Think of the index as an offset from the start of the slice, if that
helps.)
The index expression books[0] gives us the Book value that’s the “zeroth”
(that is, first) element in the slice. books[1] would be the next book, 
books[2] the book after that, and so on.
You might be wondering, then, what happens if we refer to the index of an
element that doesn’t exist. For example, our books slice has three elements,
whose index numbers are 0, 1, and 2 respectively. So what would we get if
we asked for index number 3? That doesn’t correspond to any element in
the slice, so it seems like it shouldn’t work. Let’s see what happens:
Oh dear:
panic: runtime error: index out of range [3] with length 3
Well, we expected some error, and here it is. First, note that the program
panics: we’ve encountered this before when we used the built-in function 
panic to fail our home-made test for BookToString.
This time, though, the program panics without us asking it to. This is
because of a runtime error: although the program compiles successfully, it
doesn’t work when we run it. And we already know the specific error in this
var first Book 
first = books[0]
fmt.Println(books[3])case, because we caused it accidentally-on-purpose to see what would
happen:
index out of range [3] with length 3
In other words, Go is telling us, you can’t ask for the fourth element of a
slice with only three elements. That must be a mistake on the part of the
programmer, so the only sensible thing for Go to do is stop the program and
wait for us to correct it.
Can we modify an individual slice element directly, using its index? It turns
out we can:
Indeed, we can use the same trick as with structs, to modify an individual
field of an individual element:
The len and append functions
We really don’t want our programs to panic, as a rule, because that would
mean they have a bug. In this case, the bug is that we recklessly indexed a
slice without first checking that it has the required number of elements.
Given a slice variable of a certain length, then, how can we tell which
indexes are safe to use? That’s equivalent to knowing how many elements
are in the slice, and there’s a built-in function len (short for “length”) for
that:
books[0] = Book{ 
    Title:  "The Power Broker", 
    Author: "Robert A. Caro", 
}
books[0].Title = "The Power Broker"This is telling us that the books slice has 2 elements. Any time we want to
request a certain slice element by its index, then, it’s wise to check the
length of the slice first using len, to make sure that the program won’t
panic.
There’s something else we can do with a slice that we couldn’t do with our
other types: we can add a new element to it. We use the built-in append
function for this:
append takes a slice and an element value (or multiple values), and returns
the modified slice, with the new value as its last element.
A collection of books
Let’s implement another feature for the bookstore: listing all books.
Suppose we implement this with a function called GetAllBooks. How shall
we write a test for it? What’s the behaviour we want?
Well, we need some concept of “the collection of books in stock”. We can
now make a guess that a slice of books will be a useful way to represent this
collection. How do we spell that in Go? Its type will be []Book.
There needs to be some []Book variable that we will use to store the books
we have in stock: our catalog. Let’s call this variable catalog, then: simple
fmt.Println(len(books)) 
// Output: 
// 2
newBook := Book{ 
    Title:  "Skyjack", 
    Author: "Geoffrey Gray", 
} 
books = append(books, newBook)and obvious.
We’re starting to put together the pieces we need: a slice variable catalog,
and a function GetAllBooks. Whatever is contained in catalog, that’s what 
GetAllBooks should return. Let’s start sketching out a test along those lines.
Setting up the world
We know we’ll need to call GetAllBooks in the test, and check its return
value against some expectation, like we did with the test for BookToString.
What’s our want? Well, we expect GetAllBooks to return a slice containing
all the books in our catalog, so that’s our want. We can make the catalog as
large or small as we want for this test, but it makes sense to keep it fairly
small, to save typing. Let’s say it contains two books:
Having set up this expected value, we can now call the function to get the
actual value:
want := []books.Book{ 
    { 
        Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
        Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
        Copies: 1, 
    }, 
    { 
        Title:  "White Heat", 
        Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
        Copies: 2, 
    }, 
}
got := books.GetAllBooks()Finally, we’re ready to compare want with got to see if the function returned
the correct result.
Comparing slices
There’s one problem. Usually in a test we compare want with got, to see if it
was as expected. But we can’t actually compare two slices in Go directly,
using the == or != operators:
if want != got { 
// invalid operation: want != got (slice can only be compared to 
nil)
Instead, we can use the standard library function slices.Equal to do this
comparison for us. It takes two slices, and tells us if they’re the same. Don’t
forget to import the slices package (most editors will do this automatically
for you when you save the file; try it!)
We want to fail the test if the two slices are not equal, so here’s how we
write that:
Notice the ! in front of slices.Equal; it’s pronounced “not”, in the same
way that the != operator is pronounced “not equal to”. In general, any
condition in an if statement can be inverted (flipped from true to false, or
vice versa) by putting the ! operator in front of it like this.
The updated test
Here’s the complete test, ready to run:
if !slices.Equal(want, got) {
func TestGetAllBooks_ReturnsAllBooks(t *testing.T) { 
    want := []books.Book{ 
        { 
            Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", (Listing books/11)
Here’s another new format placeholder: instead of %v, we’ve used %#v. This
prints its corresponding data as a Go value—in this case, it’ll be a slice of 
Book structs.
It’s not compiling yet, because the GetAllBooks function doesn’t exist, but
we know what to do about that. Just as we did with the test for 
BookToString, we’ll write a dummy version of the function that does
basically nothing, and we’ll use that to check that the test works.
GOAL: Add the minimum code necessary to get this test to compile and
fail.
HINT: Well, we know we need a new function. The test makes it clear what
the name of this function should be, and what parameters (if any) it takes.
Because we’ll be comparing its result with our want variable, the function
must return the same type as want: that is, []Book.
            Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
            Copies: 1, 
        }, 
        { 
            Title:  "White Heat", 
            Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
            Copies: 2, 
        }, 
    } 
    got := books.GetAllBooks() 
    if !slices.Equal(want, got) { 
        t.Fatalf("want %#v, got %#v", want, got)
    } 
}Can you see what to do?
SOLUTION: Here’s the simplest incorrect version of GetAllBooks that I
can think of:
It returns an empty slice of Book, which definitely isn’t the same as want, so
the test should fail, and indeed it does:
--- FAIL: TestGetAllBooks (0.00s) 
    books_test.go:24: want []books.Book{books.Book{Title:"In the 
    Company of Cheerful Ladies", Author:"Alexander McCall Smith", 
    Copies:1}, books.Book{Title:"White Heat", Author:"Dominic 
    Sandbrook", Copies:2}}, got []books.Book{}
We can see that the %#v format prints the want slice using Go syntax, and it
contains what we expect. The got slice is empty, also as we expect, and that
makes the test fail, so everything’s working as it should. Great. Let’s go
ahead and make the test pass now.
Implementing GetAllBooks
GOAL: Make this test pass.
HINT: We already have the “skeleton” version of GetAllBooks, which
returns an empty slice. All you need to do is change it to return a slice with
some elements. And you know what the elements should be: they’re the
same as the ones in our want variable in the test. See what you can do.
SOLUTION: Here’s one way to do it:
func GetAllBooks() []Book { 
    return []Book{} 
}(Listing books/11)
This passes, and we can also use gotestdox to remind us what our test
asserts about the function’s behaviour:
gotestdox
✔  GetAllBooks returns all books (0.00s)
Because of course it does! Another good choice of name, I think; there’s a
lot to be said for obviousness-oriented programming.
A global catalog variable
If your solution is different, that’s okay. If it passes the test, that’s all we
need for the moment. For example, you could have defined the catalog
variable inside the GetAllBooks function, instead of outside. Or you could
var catalog = []Book{ 
    { 
        Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
        Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
        Copies: 1, 
    }, 
    { 
        Title:  "White Heat", 
        Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
        Copies: 2, 
    }, 
} 
 
func GetAllBooks() []Book { 
    return catalog 
}even have dispensed with the variable altogether, and returned the slice as a
literal. That’s fine.
I chose to do it this way because we know that in the real bookshop our
catalog of books won’t always be a fixed value. It will vary over time, as
we add and remove books from stock, so it makes sense to store the books
in a variable.
And because we’ll probably want to write functions to add and remove
books, they’ll also need access to this variable. If we defined catalog in the
body of the GetAllBooks function, then no other function would be able to
see it: it would be local to that function.
Up to now, all the variables we’ve defined have been local ones. Their
scope—the part of the program that’s allowed to refer to them—has been
confined to the function body they live in. But, by moving the var
declaration outside the function, we can also create variables whose scope
is the whole package. That makes them visible to any function within the
package, and that’ll be useful to us later on.
Variables like this are sometimes loosely called “global”, by contrast with
“local”. But since Go programs can be made up of multiple packages, it’s
not really correct to say that catalog is a global variable. To be accurate, we
should call it “package-scoped”: it’s only visible within the package where
it’s defined.
Now that we’ve expanded the capabilities of our bookstore to stock more
than one book, let’s try it out! Suppose we use our new GetAllBooks
function to write a new version of the list program that users can run to
see the complete catalog of books in stock.
We could start with something like this in cmd/list/main.go:
func main() { 
    fmt.Println(books.GetAllBooks()) 
}Let’s see what it looks like:
go run ./cmd/list
[{In the Company of Cheerful Ladies Alexander McCall Smith 1} 
{White Heat Dominic Sandbrook 2}]
Mmm. It’s correct, but the formatting could be nicer. This kind of output is
fine for us programmers, when we’re testing the code, but real users would
like something a bit more friendly. What can we do?
Improving the output format
Actually, we already have a nice function for formatting a book’s details as
a user-readable string: it’s BookToString. Now we can start getting some
wins from the abstraction-based approach, by plugging this component
together with the “get all books” component.
Here’s a first attempt:
But this doesn’t compile:
go run ./cmd/list
cannot use books.GetAllBooks() (value of type []books.Book) as 
books.Book value in argument to books.BookToString
Okay, that sort of makes sense. We defined BookToString to take a single 
Book as its argument. But what we’re passing here is what GetAllBooks
returns, which is a slice of books, that is, []Book. That’s a different type to 
Book, so Go won’t accept it.
How can we fix this mismatch? We could change BookToString to accept a
slice of books, and format them all. But that probably wouldn’t be the best
func main() { 
    fmt.Println(books.BookToString(books.GetAllBooks())) 
}idea, because then if we wanted to print the details of only one book, we’d
have the opposite problem!
Instead, what we really want to do is take each book one at a time, use 
BookToString to format its details, and print the result. If we repeat this
process for every book in the catalog, it’ll produce the output we need.
A program construct that repeats the same bit of code several times is called
a loop, and in Go we use the for keyword for that. When we combine it
with the range operator, we get a loop that executes once for each element
of a slice. Perfect!
(Listing books/11)
There’s one thing that looks a bit puzzling about this for ... range
construct. We can see that, each time we enter the loop, book is the next
book in the slice. That makes sense: we’re executing some code “for each
book”, if you like. But what’s this mysterious underscore (_)?
The answer is that the range operator gives us two values, not one, for each
slice element. The second, book, is the element itself, as you’d expect. But
the first will be the index of that element: these go 0, 1, 2…, as we saw
earlier in this chapter.
As it happens, we don’t use the index numbers in this program, so we’ll
ignore them, by putting _ in the place where a variable name would go (_ is
called the blank identifier: it means “I don’t need this, thanks”).
func main() { 
    for _, book := range books.GetAllBooks() { 
        fmt.Println(books.BookToString(book)) 
    } 
}
for _, book := range...Let’s try out the updated program:
go run ./cmd/list
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies by Alexander McCall Smith 
(copies: 1) 
White Heat by Dominic Sandbrook (copies: 2)
Very nice!
Unique identifiers
We’ve added some useful functionality for our prospective bookstore
colleagues: they can run a program and print out the complete catalog of
books in stock. This is great as far as it goes, but we can already see some
limitations.
Finding a specific book
For example, suppose a customer asks if we have a certain book in stock.
The program we have could answer that question, but the user would have
to print out the whole catalog and then read through it, book by book, until
they eventually find the book the customer wants. Or, if they can’t find it,
they’ll have to conclude that it’s not in stock.
That’s rather laborious and error-prone work, which is the sort of thing that
computers are supposed to help us avoid. What we’d like here is the ability
to find a specific book in the catalog, if it exists, and see the details.
That sounds like a function we could write, doesn’t it? Let’s call it GetBook.
We could call it, specifying the book we want, and it could return the
corresponding Book struct. Then we could print it out, using BookToString,
for example.
So, how do we “specify” a book? The customer might know the title and
the author, or only the title, or only the author. Or they might not know
either of those things, and the task of finding what they want might be evenharder: “You know, the one with the boy wizard, not Harry Potter, the other
one”.
In a real bookstore, it would be useful to search the catalog by any property
of the book, such as author or title, and maybe even do “fuzzy” searches,
such as finding all books with “vampire” in the title.
Let’s take things one step at a time, though, and start with a very simple
search facility: we’ll assume each book has some kind of unique identifier,
and when we pass that to GetBook, we’ll either find the corresponding book,
or we’ll know that it’s not in the catalog.
How do we uniquely identify a book, then? Not by its title, because there
can be many books with the same title. Nor by its author, naturally. We need
something that’s guaranteed to be different for each book. There is such a
thing as an International Standard Book Number (ISBN), but not every
book has one.
We’re going to need to create our own unique identifier (ID) for each book.
To be clear, it doesn’t matter what that value actually is for any given book,
only that it’s unique within our catalog. If the book already has an ISBN,
we could use that, or we could assign our own IDs to books that don’t have
them.
What type would make sense for the ID field, then? Well, int wouldn’t
work, because an ISBN contains letters as well as numbers. In general, we
can’t know in advance what format the ID might take. So the safest choice
for this field is string, because a string can hold letters, numbers, or any
other characters defined by Unicode.
Designing GetBook to take a book ID
Now we can start to see how to sketch out a test for GetBook. It would take a
string parameter representing the book ID, which can be whatever we want
for the purposes of the test (“abc”, for example). Assuming there is a book
in our catalog with such an ID, which we’ll need to arrange, then the test
can check that GetBook returns exactly that book.Over to you to have a go at this, then!
GOAL: Write a test for GetBook along the suggested lines, making the
necessary changes to the rest of the program to get it to compile, and the
test to fail. Remember, you don’t need to implement the real version of 
GetBook yet, only the test, and a stub version of GetBook that returns the
wrong answer.
HINT: You know how to write a test, how to add a new field to a struct
type, and so on. See how far you can get before looking at the suggested
solution.
SOLUTION: Here’s what I came up with:
There’s one extra new feature that I sneaked in: the t.Parallel(). This tells
Go that it’s okay to run this test in parallel with others: that is, at the same
time. If you have more than one CPU in your computer, which you almost
certainly do, then Go can put them all to work running tests at the same
time, which makes sense.
func TestGetBook_FindsBookInCatalogByID(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    want := books.Book{ 
        ID:     "abc", 
        Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
        Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
        Copies: 1, 
    } 
    got := books.GetBook("abc") 
    if want != got { 
        t.Fatalf("want %#v, got %#v", want, got)
    } 
}We’ll add t.Parallel() to our other tests, too. There’s no reason not to run
tests in parallel, and in general it’s a good idea: it saves time, and when you
have a lot of tests, the saving can be quite significant.
This test isn’t too complicated in itself. The name makes sense when seen
through gotestdox:
GetBook finds book in catalog by ID
We assert that if the book “In the Company of Cheerful Ladies” has the
arbitrary ID abc, then when we call GetBook with that ID, it should return
the book we’re looking for.
Adding the ID field to Book
We’ve referenced a field ID on Book as though it existed, but it doesn’t yet.
Let’s add it:
(Listing books/12)
The order of the fields doesn’t matter for our program, so you could put the 
ID field first, last, or anywhere you like.
We still have a compile error because no function GetBook exists, but you
know how to deal with that. We can write a very simple stub version of 
GetBook:
type Book struct { 
    Title  string 
    Author string 
    Copies int 
    ID     string 
}
func GetBook(ID string) Book { 
    return Book{} It doesn’t actually matter what we return for now, so long as it’s the wrong
answer, and a completely empty Book struct will certainly be that. In fact, as
you now know, variables always have default values in Go, so a Book where
we don’t explicitly set any of the fields will nonetheless contain the default
values for each of those fields.
The program now compiles, and the test fails in the way we expect:
--- FAIL: TestGetBook_FindsBookInCatalogByID (0.00s) 
    books_test.go:40: want books.Book{Title:"In the Company of 
    Cheerful Ladies", Author:"Alexander McCall Smith", Copies:1, 
    ID:"abc"}, got books.Book{Title:"", Author:"", Copies:0, ID:""}
Nice work! Now let’s see if we can make the test pass, by writing the real
version of GetBook.
Implementing GetBook
This isn’t actually all that difficult, and it doesn’t require any knowledge
that you don’t already have. What you might find challenging at first is
figuring out what to do.
In other words, if you had an algorithm—an English description of the steps
the function needs to take—you could probably work out how to express
that in Go code. But what’s our algorithm here?
One trick I use in a situation like this is to ask myself, “What would I do
manually?” That is to say, if I were looking for a particular book among a
bunch of real, physical books, what would I do?
I can’t rely on the books being in any particular order—that would be great,
but we don’t have that luxury. Putting the books in order would be a long
and laborious process.
Instead, I’d just look at every book in turn, asking myself “Is this book’s ID
the one I’m looking for?” When I find the one with the matching ID (or
}don’t), then I’m done. It would be a bit tedious for a human, but computers
are very fast, and they don’t mind repetitive tasks. As Richard Feynman
said, “The inside of a computer is dumb as hell, but it goes like mad!”
Let’s see if we can write this procedure in Go, then. First, can we figure out
how to look at each book in the catalog in turn? Yes, we know how to do
this already, using for ... range, as we did in Listing books/11:
And we also know how to use an if statement to do something if some
condition is true. Here, the condition is that the ID of this book is the one
we’re looking for:
If this is the book we want, in other words, then return it—we’re done! No
need to keep on searching through the remaining books, since we’ve found
what we were looking for.
A first attempt at GetBook
Here’s our first sketch:
for _, book := range catalog {
if book.ID == ID { 
    return book 
}
func GetBook(ID string) Book { 
    for _, book := range catalog { 
        if book.ID == ID { 
            return book 
        } 
    } 
}But there’s a problem: this doesn’t compile. Go complains, at the end of the
function:
missing return
That’s because the function signature declares that it always returns a Book.
But, looking at this code, we can see that it might not!
If we loop over all the books there are, and none of them match the
requested ID… then what? We can’t just say “oh well”, and exit the
function without a result.
The “comma, ok” pattern
The function must return something, because its signature promises that it
will. And it has to be a Book:
If we don’t find the requested book, though, what Book value should we
return? There isn’t an obvious right answer.
Returning multiple results
We could use an empty Book struct, as we did in the stub version, but that’s
annoying for users. Every time they called GetBook, they’d have no way of
knowing whether the requested book was actually found.
To find this out, they’d have to look at the ID of the returned book to see if
it matches the ID they asked for. If it does, well and good, but if not, then it
must be the empty string, meaning that an empty Book value was returned,
meaning that the ID wasn’t found. That’s more paperwork than users should
have to do.
When we call this function, what we’d like is a simple yes-or-no indicator,
telling us whether the book was found or not. That’s not impossible, but the
func GetBook(ID string) Book {problem is that we already declared the function to return a result of type 
Book, which isn’t a yes-or-no data type. What can we do?
We can return two results from the function! This is a neat feature of Go
which isn’t available in every other programming language, and it comes in
handy for cases like this. And Go also has exactly the data type we need:
it’s called bool, short for “Boolean”.
Boolean values
Not the most intuitive name, perhaps, but it’s named after the
mathematician George Boole, who was one of the first to explore the idea
of binary numbers (in effect, values that can be “yes” or “no”). As you can
imagine, that’s a pretty fundamental concept in computing, so Boolean
values are used a lot.
It doesn’t actually matter what we choose to call the two possible values of
a bool: think of them as “yes” or “no”, 0 or 1, “true” or “false”, and so on.
The point is that they can only be one or the other.
In Go the possible values of a bool are called true and false. As with the
other data types we’ve met already, we can declare a variable of type bool
and assign it one of the possible values:
And we can also take bool parameters to functions, or have them return 
bool results. That’s what we need here, in fact: a result value from GetBook
that means “found” or “not found”.
Let’s update GetBook to return a bool along with the Book, then:
var bookFound bool 
bookFound = true 
bookFound = false
func GetBook(ID string) (Book, bool) {Notice that now we have to put parentheses around the list of results, as we
do with the list of parameters. If there were only one result, we could leave
out the parentheses, but as soon as we have two or more results, the
parentheses are required.
This extra result will be a signal to callers: “Yes, I’ve found the book you
wanted”, or ”Sorry, we don’t have that book in stock”, depending on what
happens in the search. If we find a match for the requested ID, then it makes
sense to return true along with the matching book:
The key point is that now we know what to return at the end of the function,
if we’ve completed the entire loop without finding the requested book. We
can return an empty Book, because there’s no other Book value that makes
sense, but we can also return false, meaning “not found”.
Here’s the updated function:
(Listing books/12)
This makes it really easy for users to check whether GetBook found the book
or not.
if book.ID == ID { 
    return book, true 
}
func GetBook(ID string) (Book, bool) { 
    for _, book := range catalog { 
        if book.ID == ID { 
            return book, true 
        } 
    } 
    return Book{}, false 
}Testing the ok value
Let’s update the test to check this second result from GetBook:
Seems reasonable, doesn’t it? We still have an assignment statement, as
before, but now because GetBook returns two values, we need two variables
on the left hand side: we’ll call them got and ok.
They’re in the same order as the results GetBook returns, naturally enough:
first the book, then the bool value meaning “found or not found”. We could
have called the second variable something like found, but it’s conventional
in Go to call it ok.
You can see why this is sometimes called the “comma, ok” pattern, because
a lot of Go code looks something like this:
Think of the ok value as indicating “Okay, I found what you wanted, and
it’s in the other result”. Or, alternatively, “Sorry, I couldn’t find what you
wanted, so don’t bother looking at the other result—it’ll be empty.”
Which answer do we expect in the test? Well, that’s a good question. In this
test, by definition we expect ok to be true, meaning that we did find the
book whose ID is “abc”. That’s why we write:
Remember how we used ! earlier to mean “not”, as in !slices.Equal? It’s
the same thing here. if !ok, pronounced “if not ok”, means “if ok is equal
got, ok := GetBook("abc") 
if !ok { 
    t.Fatal("book not found") 
}
_, ok := Get(something)
if !ok {to false”. In other words, if the ID is not found, then the test should fail.
Here’s what we have so far:
(Listing books/12)
This test checks one of the possible behaviours of GetBook. Namely, when
we search for a book that is in the catalog, we should find it.
Programmers often call this the “happy path”, meaning what’s supposed to
happen if everything goes according to plan. But, since that isn’t always the
case, we also need to account for the “sad path”.
The sad path
The other possible behaviour of GetBook is that when we search for a book
that’s not in the catalog, we shouldn’t find anything. You might think that’s
func TestGetBook_FindsBookInCatalogByID(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    want := books.Book{ 
        ID:     "abc", 
        Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
        Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
        Copies: 1, 
    } 
    got, ok := books.GetBook("abc") 
    if !ok { 
        t.Fatal("book not found") 
    } 
    if want != got { 
        t.Fatalf("want %#v, got %#v", want, got)
    } 
}not worth testing, but it is.
We can imagine, for example, accidentally writing a bug that makes 
GetBook always return true for ok, no matter whether the book is found or
not. That would make a user’s program behave incorrectly, so we need to be
able to catch this kind of problem.
Let’s also separately test that when the book is not found, ok is false:
(Listing books/12)
There’s no want this time, because we’re not expecting to find the book, so
we don’t need to compare it with anything. Indeed, we don’t need the
variable got either, so we use the blank identifier _ to ignore the first value
returned by GetBook.
The only thing we’re interested in for this test is the ok value. Since we
expect it to be false for a nonexistent book, we fail the test if it’s true
(that’s what if ok means).
Adding IDs to the catalog
We can now run these tests and see what happens. Well, the “book not
found” test passes, which is encouraging. The “book found” test doesn’t,
though, and the reason isn’t hard to figure out. We’re searching for a book
with a specific ID, and the books in our catalog don’t actually have IDs yet.
func TestGetBook_ReturnsFalseWhenBookNotFound(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    _, ok := books.GetBook("nonexistent ID") 
    if ok { 
        t.Fatal("want false for nonexistent ID, got true") 
    } 
}Or rather, since struct fields always have a default value, every book’s ID
field is the empty string. Let’s fix that:
(Listing books/12)
We’re saying it doesn’t matter what ID we assign to each book, as long as
they’re all different (and correspond to the ones we expect in the tests).
Fixing the tests
That fixes the “book found” test, but now our previous test, for 
GetAllBooks, is failing:
--- FAIL: TestGetAllBooks_ReturnsAllBooks (0.00s) 
    books_test.go:26: want []books.Book{books.Book{Title:"In the 
    Company of Cheerful Ladies", Author:"Alexander McCall Smith", 
    Copies:1, ID:""}, books.Book{Title:"White Heat", 
    Author:"Dominic Sandbrook", Copies:2, ID:""}}, got 
    []books.Book{books.Book{Title:"In the Company of Cheerful 
    Ladies", Author:"Alexander McCall Smith", Copies:1, ID:"abc"}, 
var catalog = []Book{ 
    { 
        Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
        Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
        Copies: 1, 
        ID:     "abc", 
    }, 
    { 
        Title:  "White Heat", 
        Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
        Copies: 2, 
        ID:     "xyz", 
    }, 
}    books.Book{Title:"White Heat", Author:"Dominic Sandbrook", 
    Copies:2, ID:"xyz"}}
Not to worry. This is the sort of thing we deal with all the time when
making changes to programs. The changes are bound to break some tests,
which is a good sign: it shows we’re testing the code thoroughly.
And in this case the code for GetAllBooks is still perfectly correct; it’s the
test that needs updating. Books now have IDs! Once we update the want
value to allow for that, everything is fine:
(Listing books/12)
func TestGetAllBooks_ReturnsAllBooks(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    want := []books.Book{ 
        { 
            Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
            Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
            Copies: 1, 
            ID:     "abc", 
        }, 
        { 
            Title:  "White Heat", 
            Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
            Copies: 2, 
            ID:     "xyz", 
        }, 
    } 
    got := books.GetAllBooks() 
    if !slices.Equal(want, got) { 
        t.Fatalf("want %#v, got %#v", want, got)
    } 
}Great job! We can list all books and search by ID. Or rather, we have the
facility to search by ID, but we don’t yet have a program that Happy Fun
Books operatives could run to actually search for something. Let’s tackle
that problem in the next chapter.
Here’s what we know so far
We’re really getting to grips now with data handling in Go. You’ve learned
how to manage collections of values with slices, how to declare slice
variables and write slice literals, how to read and write individual elements,
how to append new elements, and how to get the length of a slice using the 
len function.
You’ve also learned how to process each element of a slice in turn using a 
for ... range loop, and how to compare two slices with slices.Equal,
which is very useful for tests. And you’ve learned about the bool type, and
how to return it from a function to signal whether or not some result is
present. Nice work!