5. Map mischief
Thanks to your excellent work in the previous chapter, we now have the
code necessary to search for a book by its ID, and retrieve its details. This is
the sort of thing that we’ll need for Happy Fun Books, so let’s write a
program that staff could run to do a book search.
A find command
First, we need to create a new subfolder in cmd for the command we’ll be
adding. Shall we call it find?
mkdir cmd/find
This is where our new main.go file will live. Let’s start with a quick sketch.
We know how to call GetBook, because we’ve already done it in a test. And
it takes the ID of the book we’re looking for, so where do we get that from?
In practice, users will want to supply the ID on the command line, but let’s
keep things simple for now and start by looking up some fixed ID:
got, ok := books.GetBook("xyz")And we know that the ok variable tells us whether the book was actually
found. If it’s not, we should probably inform the user:
How polite! Courtesy costs nothing, after all. If the book is found, though,
we should print out its details, and we know how to do that, too:
Implementing find
The pieces are coming together. Here’s what we have:
if !ok { 
    fmt.Println("Sorry, I couldn't find that book in the 
catalog.") 
    return 
}
fmt.Println(books.BookToString(book))
package main
 
import ( 
    "books" 
    "fmt" 
) 
 
func main() { 
    book, ok := books.GetBook("xyz") 
    if !ok { 
        fmt.Println("Sorry, I couldn't find that book in the 
catalog.") 
        return 
    } Let’s run it and see what happens:
go run ./cmd/find
White Heat by Dominic Sandbrook (copies: 2)
Great. But we need to be able to search for any book by ID, not just this
one. That means we’ll need to be able to supply the ID as an argument to
the program. For example, users might run a command like:
go run ./cmd/find abc
Command-line arguments and os.Args
The standard library has a variable os.Args that we can use to get the
command-line arguments. os.Args is a slice of strings, and when the
program starts, the arguments the user gave to it will be the elements of this
slice.
There’s one peculiarity to know about: the program name itself is also
included in os.Args, as the first element (os.Args[0]). Usually we don’t
need this, but it can be helpful sometimes. Mostly, though, we want only the
command-line arguments, which start at os.Args[1].
Fine. If the user gives the book ID as an argument, that string should end up
in os.Args[1]. Let’s see what we can do:
    fmt.Println(books.BookToString(book)) 
}
package main
 
import ( 
    "books" 
    "fmt" 
    "os" This looks reasonable, so here goes:
go run ./cmd/find abc
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies by Alexander McCall Smith 
(copies: 1)
Checking arguments
This is encouraging, but now that the program requires an argument, what
will happen if we run it without one?
go run ./cmd/find
panic: runtime error: index out of range [1] with length 1
Whoops! This makes sense under the circumstances: as we saw in the
previous chapter, asking for a slice element that doesn’t exist is a run-time
error. But the message isn’t very friendly. Let’s instead check to see if we
have an argument, and if not, show a more useful response:
) 
 
func main() { 
    ID := os.Args[1] 
    book, ok := books.GetBook(ID) 
    if !ok { 
        fmt.Println("Sorry, I couldn't find that book in the 
catalog.") 
        return 
    } 
    fmt.Println(books.BookToString(book)) 
}(Listing books/13)
Now we not only don’t panic if the ID is missing, but we also show the user
an example of how to use the program correctly. Much better.
Go is a popular language for writing command-line tools, and even a text-
based user interface can be quite sophisticated. If you think about the go
tool itself, it takes all sorts of arguments, verbs, flags, and so on, and the
code to handle them can be complicated to write, as well as to test.
We won’t go into all that stuff too much here, because I’ve written a whole
other book about it: The Power of Go: Tools covers the art of writing
powerful and usable tools in Go with delightful user interfaces. It’s the ideal
next step after you’ve finished this book: you’ll learn all about files and
filesystems, shells, test scripting, and more.
For now, we’ll stick to programs with very simple interfaces, which makes
the code easier to write, and the programs easier to use.
func main() { 
    if len(os.Args) != 2 { 
        fmt.Println("Usage: find <BOOK ID>") 
        return 
    } 
    ID := os.Args[1] 
    book, ok := books.GetBook(ID) 
    if !ok { 
        fmt.Println("Sorry, I couldn't find that book in the 
catalog.") 
        return 
    } 
    fmt.Println(books.BookToString(book)) 
}A more efficient data structure
We’ve made good progress towards supporting Happy Fun Books
operations, but there’s still something that’s not ideal about the way we’ve
implemented GetBook here. Given a book ID, we search for it in the catalog
by looking at every book in turn, asking, in effect, “Is this the one? No? Is
this the one? No…” and so on.
Clearly this works, in that it’s guaranteed to find the book eventually if it’s
in the catalog. But, with a large catalog, “eventually” could be quite a long
time. We might be lucky and find the desired book near the start of the
catalog, or we might be unlucky and only find it near the end.
Big-O notation
On average, using a linear search strategy like this, if we have N books,
we’ll have to check N/2 of them before we find the one we want. That
means the more books we have, the slower it becomes to find any one of
them. Surely we can do better than that?
In computer science, there’s a way to describe this behaviour of an
algorithm as the number of items scales up: it’s called big-O notation. For
example, since the time to search the catalog grows linearly (that is, in
direct proportion) with the number of books N, we say that our algorithm is
O(N), or “order N”. The bigger N is, the longer the search takes (on
average).
In database jargon, a search like this is called a full table scan, and it’s
relatively slow, so we’d prefer to avoid it when speed is important (such as
when customers are lining up around the block to buy their copy of Shelby
Foote’s The Civil War: A Narrative).
Maybe a slice isn’t the best way to store our book catalog, then. Ideally, we
want a data structure that can map a book ID directly to the corresponding
book (in database jargon this is called an index on the book ID).A search like this would be O(1), or “order 1”, meaning that the search time
never gets any longer, no matter how many books we have. That sounds
great! Can we do it?
Introducing the map
It turns out that Go has exactly the data type we want, and it’s called a map.
Nothing to do with geography; this is “mapping” in the mathematical sense
of associating elements of one set (book IDs, for example) with those of
another set (the corresponding books).
A map is quite similar to a slice, in a way: it’s a way of grouping together a
bunch of elements, all of the same type. The difference between maps and
slices is the way we store and retrieve those elements.
To get a specific element of a slice, as we’ve already seen, we can use its
index, that is, its position in the slice. In effect, we’re mapping some unique,
non-negative integer to some corresponding element.
A map is just the same, but the index doesn’t have to be an integer! The key
can be (almost) any Go type. For example, we could use a string, such as
our book ID.
The nice thing about a map is that we don’t have to search through every
element in turn to find a specific one. Given the right key, the map will
return the corresponding element straight away (provided it exists, that is).
This means that, no matter how large our catalog of books, book searches
will always take the same amount of time. That sounds perfect, so let’s see
if we can update the program to use a map instead of a slice for the catalog.
First of all, do we need to update the tests? Surprisingly, perhaps, we don’t.
The only two functions affected are GetBook and GetAllBooks, and while
we’ll need to change their implementation, their behaviour won’t change.
(At least, not in a way that’s visible to the tests; they’ll probably be faster,
though, especially with real data).The most important change we’ll need to make is to the definition of the 
catalog variable: the central repository of books we have in stock. Right
now, it’s defined as a slice of Book, and we need to change that to a map
instead.
As you’ll remember from the previous chapter, there’s no such type as “a
slice” in Go, only a slice of some specific type such as Book. Similarly,
there’s no such type as “a map”, only a map of some type (the key) to some
other type (the element).
What do we need here? Our key will be a string, like “abc”. The element,
as before, will be a Book. That type in Go is spelt map[string]Book, and
pronounced “map of string to Book”. It’s all one word, no spaces, with map
followed by the key type in square brackets, followed by the element type:
Writing a map literal of this type is pretty straightforward:
map[string]Book
var catalog = map[string]Book{ 
    "abc": { 
        Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
        Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
        Copies: 1, 
        ID:     "abc", 
    }, 
    "xyz": { 
        Title:  "White Heat", 
        Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
        Copies: 2, 
        ID:     "xyz", 
    }, 
}(Listing books/13)
It’s quite similar to the corresponding slice literal, isn’t it? The only
difference is that instead of a comma-separated list of elements, we have a
comma-separated list of key-element pairs:
Turning maps into slices
Okay. Since we’ve changed the type of catalog, we expect to also have to
make some changes to the functions that access the catalog: GetBook and 
GetAllBooks. Let’s check GetAllBooks first. Do we have any compile
errors?
Yes, we do. Here’s the code we have right now:
When catalog itself was defined as a []Book, this was fine. Essentially, 
GetAllBooks has no real work to do: it returns catalog directly.
This won’t do now that we’ve changed catalog to be a map: we get a type
mismatch.
cannot use catalog (variable of type map[string]Book) as []Book 
value in return statement
Makes sense, doesn’t it? The function’s signature says it returns a []Book,
and that’s what we still want it to do. But catalog is not of that type; it’s of
type map[string]Book instead. How can we turn one into the other?
"key": element, 
...
func GetAllBooks() []Book { 
    return catalog 
}Well, we could do it the laborious way. We could write a for ... range
loop over the map, appending each book to a slice of results that we then
return. That would work, but there’s a more concise way to do it.
First, instead of ranging over the map to visit each book in turn, we can use
the standard library maps.Values function to get all the elements of the map
at once. To do that, we’ll import the maps package:
Now we can write:
Iterators, maps.Values, and slices.Collect
This is neat, but we’re not quite done yet. What maps.Values gives us is, not
a slice of Book, but an iterator of Book. You could think of an iterator as
being like a “lazy slice”: it doesn’t actually produce any elements until you
ask it to.
Since we very often want to visit each element in a sequence in turn, an
iterator is perfect for this. It doesn’t waste time computing all the elements
before we need them, and it doesn’t allocate the memory required to hold
all the elements at once. It yields one element at a time, and only when we
actually ask for it.
To do that, we could use a range loop to visit each element in turn:
But another very common thing to do with an iterator is to collect all its
elements into a slice, and that’s what we want to do here. We can use 
import "maps"
books := maps.Values(catalog)
for book := range maps.Values(catalog) { 
    ... // do something with each `book` 
}slices.Collect to do that. First, we’ll import the slices package:
Then we can write GetAllBooks like this:
(Listing books/13)
To get a map’s elements as a slice, then, we first of all get an iterator of the
elements using maps.Values. Then we use slices.Collect to consume that
iterator and collect all the elements into a slice. And that’s our result.
Unfortunately, there are so many other things I want to cover in this book
that there isn’t really space to talk much about iterators, though it’s a
fascinating subject and well worth understanding. My book Know Go goes
into all the detail we can’t include here, as well as explaining the very
important topics of interfaces and generics. By the time you’ve finished this
book, you’ll be in the perfect position to start learning those more advanced
concepts.
Slices and maps have a lot in common
So, what changes do we need to make to GetBook? Here’s what we have
right now:
import "slices"
func GetAllBooks() []Book { 
    return slices.Collect(maps.Values(catalog)) 
}
func GetBook(ID string) (Book, bool) { 
    for _, book := range catalog { 
        if book.ID == ID { 
            return book, true 
        } (Listing books/12)
Surprisingly, perhaps, this still compiles, and still passes the test! That’s
because slices and maps are really quite similar: both work with range, for
example, and both produce the results you’d expect. That makes sense if
you think of a slice as a special case of a map: one where the keys are
constrained to be non-negative integers.
With a slice, range gives us each index and element pair in turn. With a
map, range gives us each key and element pair in turn.
That’s what we’re getting here, so each time round the loop, book is the next
book in the map, and we check its ID against the one we’re looking for. So
this code works exactly as it did before, except that it’s looping over a map
rather than a slice.
That’s not terrible, but recall that we were motivated to make this change in
the first place by the fact that we don’t want to have to search through N/2
books every time. We wanted a catalog type that lets us retrieve a book
directly by ID, in a single O(1) lookup, without searching.
And we have that now, so let’s take advantage of it. How do we look up an
element in a map by key? We can use exactly the same syntax as for
looking up a slice element by index:
Not so fast, though: we know that the book with that ID might not be in the
catalog. What happens then? What value gets assigned to book?
Well, it’s the zero value, which you’ll remember is whatever the default
value is for that particular type. With string, for example, it’s the empty
    } 
    return Book{}, false 
}
book := catalog[ID]string, and with int, it’s 0.
What about with a struct, then? For example, what would the zero value of
a Book struct be? The answer is that it’s a Book where every field has its
default value. That is:
Okay, good to know, but as you’ll recall from the previous chapter, this isn’t
how GetBook works. Instead, GetBook returns a second, bool value along
with the Book result, indicating whether or not the book was found.
The ok syntax
How do we know whether or not the book was found, if the map lookup
returns only a “zero” Book? Well, it turns out there’s a very convenient way
to do that. We can receive two values from the map instead of one:
And it’s not a coincidence that we named the second value ok, because
that’s what it is: it’s a bool value that’s true if the book was found, or false
otherwise. Just what we need!
Here’s the updated implementation of GetBook:
Book{ 
    Title:  "", 
    Author: "", 
    Copies: 0, 
    ID:     "", 
}
book, ok := catalog[ID]
func GetBook(ID string) (Book, bool) { 
    book, ok := catalog[ID] (Listing books/13)
This is nicer than the loop we had before, and its performance also scales a
lot better. No matter how many books we have in stock, GetBook will
always take more or less exactly the same time. Great!
So, does our find program still work? Let’s try:
go run ./cmd/find abc
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies by Alexander McCall Smith 
(copies: 1)
Nice. Let’s check list, too:
go run ./cmd/list
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies by Alexander McCall Smith 
(copies: 1) 
White Heat by Dominic Sandbrook (copies: 2)
And one more time, for luck:
go run ./cmd/list
White Heat by Dominic Sandbrook (copies: 2) 
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies by Alexander McCall Smith 
(copies: 1)
Wait, what? It looks like they came out in a different order the second time.
Why would they do that?
Iteration order of maps
Well, as you probably suspected, the reason is to do with the fact that we’re
now storing the catalog in a map instead of a slice. A slice is, by definition,
    return book, ok 
}an ordered sequence, so when we loop over it, we always get the elements
in index order.
That’s not true of a map. While there’s an obvious and sensible way to order
a bunch of numbers, the keys of a map don’t have to be numbers, or even
strings. So, since there’s not guaranteed to be any well-defined order for the
keys, when we iterate over a map like this we’ll get its elements in arbitrary
order, and it will be different from one run of the program to the next.
That’s fine, and it doesn’t matter in what order we print the books for the 
list program, but what about the GetAllBooks test? Doesn’t that compare
the result of GetAllBooks with a slice where the books are in a fixed order?
Yes, it does, and that means we can’t rely on this test always passing.
Sometimes it will pass, by coincidence, but there must be times when it will
fail. And we can prove that, by running the test a bunch of times:
go test -count=100
The result of GetAllBooks is in the expected order about 90% of the time,
but we don’t want our tests failing for no good reason once in every ten
runs. After all, the program is correct: it’s the test that’s unreliable, because
it’s assuming something about the result of GetAllBooks that isn’t always
true.
And we don’t care about the order of the books returned by GetAllBooks,
only that they’re all there. We can fix this flaky test by sorting the result
slice before we compare it to the expected one.
Sorting structs by field
So, how to do that? If we had a slice of some ordered type (that is, a type
like int or string where the ordering of values is obvious), we could sort it
easily by using slices.Sort. But that’s not the case here.
slices.Sort won’t work for a slice of Book because Go doesn’t know how
to compare two Book values. Should they be ordered by title, author, numberof copies, or their ID fields? It’s up to us to decide, and it doesn’t matter for
our purposes, so let’s sort them by author.
To do that, we can use slices.SortFunc, which will sort a slice by asking us
to provide a function that compares any two values. Here’s what that looks
like:
(Listing books/13)
The first argument to SortFunc is the slice to sort, reasonably enough. The
second is the comparison function we’re providing. It takes two Book
values, which we call a and b, and returns a number indicating whether a
should be sorted before or after b.
We don’t need to do anything fancy here, since we want to sort the books
by author, so we use the cmp.Compare function to compare the Author fields
of the two values. With this done, the test has now stopped flaking:
go test -count=100
PASS
Any time we’re testing code that queries a map, like GetAllBooks, we’ll
probably want to use this technique to make sure the test is reliable. Since
sorting is a relatively expensive operation, we don’t want to do it in 
GetAllBooks, because users don’t care about the order of the books; it only
matters for testing.
Modifying the catalog
got := books.GetAllBooks() 
slices.SortFunc(got, func(a, b books.Book) int { 
    return cmp.Compare(a.Author, b.Author) 
})There’s one problem we haven’t yet solved: how do books get into the
catalog in the first place?
In other words, suppose a delivery of books arrives at one of our stores, and
the staff now need to enter the details of the new titles into the catalog. How
do they do that? Right now, the books in the catalog are fixed by the Go
source code of the books package, so to add new books, we’d have to edit
that source code and recompile the program. Not ideal!
The magic function
We’d like to be able to add (and, indeed, remove) books without changing
the program itself. After all, the idea is that Happy Fun Books can scale up
to many locations, each of which would have a different catalog of books,
but all using the same store management software.
Let’s design this new feature using what I sometimes call the “magic
function” approach. That is, we imagine that there’s some wonderful
function that does exactly what we want, in the way we want it to. What
would it look like to call that function?
The most straightforward way we could imagine adding a new book to the
catalog is something like this:
That is, we’re imagining that there’s some function we can call, named 
AddBook, and we pass it a Book struct, and it adds that book to the catalog.
Seems reasonable, doesn’t it? Sure, this function doesn’t exist yet, but we
can already see that it would fit well into our existing package.
AddBook(Book{
    ID:     "123", 
    Title:  "The Prize of all the Oceans", 
    Author: "Glyn Williams", 
    Copies: 2, 
})Testing AddBook
The name is obvious and says exactly what it does: AddBook. It makes sense
that it would take a Book as its argument, and at the moment we can’t think
of anything that it would usefully return. This seems like a good starting
point.
GOAL: Write a new test for our (still imaginary) AddBook function. I’ll
leave the details up to you. Make sure it fails with a dummy implementation
of AddBook that does nothing.
HINT: Now you’re stretching your legs a bit as a Go developer. It’s not
merely a matter of writing the code for the test: you’ve also got to decide
what the test should do.
You’ve had some practice at this already, but if nothing occurs to you right
away, try the trick of describing to yourself in English what a useful test
would assert about the results of calling AddBook.
For example, when you call AddBook, something should change, but what?
And how can you tell? See if you can figure it out.
SOLUTION: Here’s my first version:
func TestAddBook_AddsGivenBookToCatalog(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    books.AddBook(books.Book{ 
        ID:     "123", 
        Title:  "The Prize of all the Oceans", 
        Author: "Glyn Williams", 
        Copies: 2, 
    }) 
    _, ok := books.GetBook("123") 
    if !ok { Reasonable, isn’t it? We add a certain book to the catalog, and then we
check to see if it was added—if so, we should be able to retrieve it by
calling GetBook with its ID (“123”).
And this test does indeed fail with the dummy AddBook, so is that it? Are we
ready to move on and implement the magic function, or do we need to mull
over the test a little more? Have one more look at the code and see if you
can spot any potential problems.
Postconditions and preconditions
Here’s one interesting question we could ask about this test: what would
happen to it if, at some time in the future, a book with the ID “123” already
existed in the catalog? Well, that would render the test completely useless!
To understand why, think about what the test would do under these
circumstances if there were indeed a bug in AddBook. For example, suppose
it did nothing at all, as our current dummy implementation does. Would this
test detect that bug?
No, it wouldn’t. It would successfully retrieve a book with the expected ID
from the catalog, even though it wasn’t put there by AddBook. The test
passes even if AddBook does nothing whatsover, and that’s actually slightly
worse than not having a test at all, because it still looks like we have a test.
What did we (okay, I) do wrong? I made a very common mistake in
software testing, which is to be concerned only with the state of the world
after calling the function under test.
In the jargon, these are called postconditions: the test asserts that the
postcondition of AddBook is that the given book exists in the catalog. But it
says nothing about the preconditions. It would be useful to assert that the
same book doesn’t exist before AddBook is called, wouldn’t it?
        t.Fatal("added book not found") 
    } 
}Fine. Let’s make that change:
Now we have a much more resilient test. Instead of merely asserting that
the world is in a certain state after AddBook is called, the test asserts that
calling AddBook actually changes the world. Isn’t that what we all want to do
as software engineers? Well, now our test reflects that.
A hint of disquiet
How should we implement AddBook for real, then? Well, first we need to
know how to add a new element to a map. The syntax is just the same as if
we were assigning to a slice element:
func TestAddBook_AddsGivenBookToCatalog(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    _, ok := books.GetBook("123") 
    if ok { 
        t.Fatal("book already present") 
    } 
    books.AddBook(books.Book{ 
        ID:     "123", 
        Title:  "The Prize of all the Oceans", 
        Author: "Glyn Williams", 
        Copies: 2, 
    }) 
    _, ok = books.GetBook("123") 
    if !ok { 
        t.Fatal("added book not found") 
    } 
}
catalog[book.ID] = bookHere’s a version of AddBook that passes the test:
So, are we done now?
Well, I don’t know about you, but all this talk about preconditions and
postconditions has made me a little nervous. We have several tests now, and
they all make various assumptions about the state of the catalog (which,
remember, is a package-level variable, so it’s shared by all the tests).
That was more or less fine as long as the catalog never changed, but now
we are changing the catalog, by adding a new book to it. And we’re using 
t.Parallel() in all our tests, to make them run concurrently. What that
means in practice is that the tests won’t run in a fixed order, one after
another: each test will be executed independently, without regard to what
other tests are doing.
That sounds like a recipe for problems, given that one test is modifying the
catalog, and other tests are making assumptions about exactly what books
are in the catalog. In fact, it seems like some of those other tests might fail
sometimes, depending on whether or not the AddBook test has run before
they look at the catalog.
So, did we get lucky with the previous test run? Let’s try the -count=100
trick again:
go test -count=100
Oh dear:
--- FAIL: TestGetAllBooks_ReturnsAllBooks (0.00s) 
    books_test.go:31: want []books.Book{books.Book{Title:"In the 
    Company of Cheerful Ladies", Author:"Alexander McCall Smith", 
    Copies:1, ID:"abc"}, books.Book{Title:"White Heat", 
    Author:"Dominic Sandbrook", Copies:2, ID:"xyz"}}, got 
func AddBook(book Book) { 
    catalog[book.ID] = book 
}    []books.Book{books.Book{Title:"In the Company of Cheerful 
    Ladies", Author:"Alexander McCall Smith", Copies:1, ID:"abc"}, 
    books.Book{Title:"White Heat", Author:"Dominic Sandbrook", 
    Copies:2, ID:"xyz"}, books.Book{Title:"The Prize of all the 
    Oceans", Author:"Glyn Williams", Copies:2, ID:"123"}}
This is exactly what we feared: the GetAllBooks test is failing, even though 
GetAllBooks itself actually works perfectly. That’s because (to spare your
eyesight a little) the test is expecting the catalog to contain exactly and only
these books:
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies 
White Heat
And what it actually found was these:
In the Company of Cheerful Ladies 
White Heat 
The Prize of all the Oceans
You can see what’s happened, can’t you? On this particular test run, the 
AddBook test added the new book right before the GetAllBooks test requested
the catalog, and as a result it found an unexpected book, which caused it to
fail.
Data races
And it gets worse, because not only are our existing tests failing, the new
test is failing too:
--- FAIL: TestAddBook_AddsGivenBookToCatalog (0.00s) 
    books_test.go:64: book already present
What’s that about? Well, count=100 doesn’t run the whole test suite a
hundred times. It runs each test a hundred times, so since there are four
tests, we now have four hundred concurrent tests running—including a
hundred instances of the AddBook test.
Suppose one instance of this test calls AddBook, and some time after that,
another instance of the same test calls GetAllBooks to check theprecondition that the book isn’t in the catalog. But it is there now, because it
was added by the other instance.
Stepping on each other’s toes
This seems like a pretty nasty problem. We don’t really want to give up
running our tests in parallel, because it’s a big time-saver. And we certainly
don’t want to give up being able to modify the catalog: that’s the whole
point of what we were trying to do!
But, on the other hand, we don’t want flaky tests, because that undermines
the whole point of having tests. What can we do? You might like to ponder
it a little yourself before reading on to hear what I think.
Your first instinct might be to take out the troublesome t.Parallel(), and I
completely understand why. If running the tests in parallel makes them
unreliable, surely the obvious answer is “don’t do that”.
But sadly, even this doesn’t solve the problem. After all, it’s not really a test
problem. Suppose we have a large branch of Happy Fun Books, with
several point-of-sale terminals. And suppose an associate is entering a new
book into the catalog at terminal A, while another is simultaneously looking
up the same book at terminal B. Does the lookup succeed or not?
“It depends,” is the only answer we can give. If the call to AddBook happens
one microsecond before the call to GetBook, then yes, the book will have
been added, so it’ll be found. But if AddBook happens one microsecond after
GetBook, then the search won’t find anything.
The two concurrent function calls are in a race, literally: whichever one
arrives at the critical section first “wins”, in some sense. That’s why this
kind of problem is called a data race: it happens when the result of some
concurrent operations depends on the microscopic details of ordering and
timing. And that’s why our tests have become unstable.
De-globalising the catalogThe fact is that we want to be able to concurrently access the catalog, and
not only for testing: real bookstores need to do this, too. To make our tests
reliable again, we need to eliminate the data race. So, how can we do that?
The simplest and safest way to fix the test problem is to prevent concurrent
access to the catalog by giving each test its own catalog. That way, any
individual test doesn’t need to worry about the contents of the catalog
changing underneath it, because no other test can change it.
Yes, in the real bookstore the concurrent terminals will still need to share a
global catalog, and there are ways of making that safe, too, but let’s tackle
one problem at a time. First, what changes do we need to make to the
existing code to eliminate the data race on catalog?
The first thing we’ll need to do is to modify the functions in books so that,
instead of referring to a single global catalog variable, they take the catalog
as a parameter:
And, happily, that’s the only change we need to make to the books package,
apart from removing the now-redundant catalog variable.
A test data helper
Let’s now fix the tests, because each test will now need to create its own 
catalog and pass it to all the functions it calls. We could write something
like this, for example:
func GetAllBooks(catalog map[string]Book) []Book 
func GetBook(catalog map[string]Book, ID string) (Book, bool) 
func AddBook(catalog map[string]Book, book Book) {
catalog := map[string]books.Book { ... } 
_, ok := books.GetBook(catalog, "123")But it’s going to be tedious and repetitive to keep defining the same map
literal in every test. Let’s move that out to a helper function:
This is a useful pattern any time you want to use the same test data in each
of a bunch of tests: abstract that setup into a little function. It’s easy to
write:
(Listing books/14)
And now every test can call getTestCatalog to get a crisp, new catalog of
its very own, without worrying about some other test unexpectedly
changing the catalog behind the scenes.
Fixing the tests
catalog := getTestCatalog()
func getTestCatalog() map[string]books.Book { 
    return map[string]books.Book{ 
        "abc": { 
            Title:  "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
            Author: "Alexander McCall Smith", 
            Copies: 1, 
            ID:     "abc", 
        }, 
        "xyz": { 
            Title:  "White Heat", 
            Author: "Dominic Sandbrook", 
            Copies: 2, 
            ID:     "xyz", 
        }, 
    } 
}Finally, we need to modify all the calls to books functions in the tests, to
add catalog as the first parameter:
…and so on. Here’s our updated test for AddBook, for example:
(Listing books/14)
With this change complete, we can now run the tests as many times as we
like in parallel and they’ll pass reliably. No more data races!
Initializing the real catalog
books.GetBook(catalog, "123")
func TestAddBook_AddsGivenBookToCatalog(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    catalog := getTestCatalog() 
    _, ok := books.GetBook(catalog, "123") 
    if ok { 
        t.Fatal("book already present") 
    } 
    books.AddBook(catalog, books.Book{ 
        ID:     "123", 
        Title:  "The Prize of all the Oceans", 
        Author: "Glyn Williams", 
        Copies: 2, 
    }) 
    _, ok = books.GetBook(catalog, "123") 
    if !ok { 
        t.Fatal("added book not found") 
    } 
}There’s one thing left to fix. Our find and list commands don’t actually
work anymore, since we removed the catalog variable from books. But we
need some real catalog for these programs to operate on, so where will that
data come from?
In other words, in the find command, for instance, we’re going to write
something like this, passing catalog as an argument to GetBook:
That means we need to assign something to catalog. In the tests we solved
this problem by calling a function that returns the catalog as a map, so let’s
use the same idea here:
And, for now, we can have that function return the exact same map we’re
using in the tests. Here’s our updated version of list, for example:
(Listing books/14)
With this seemingly rather superficial change, we’ve added a lot of value to
the books package. Not only can we run any number of tests reliably in
parallel, even if they modify the contents of the catalog, we’ve also made it
so that individual bookstores can now have different catalogs, in principle.
book, ok := books.GetBook(catalog, ID)
catalog := books.GetCatalog()
func main() { 
    catalog := books.GetCatalog() 
    for _, book := range books.GetAllBooks(catalog) { 
        fmt.Println(books.BookToString(book)) 
    } 
}In the next chapter, we’ll extend this idea a little further, turning both books
and catalogs into objects that encapsulate both data and behaviour.
Here’s what we know so far
You’ve now mastered maps as a data structure, and that’s huge: practically
every program you ever write in Go will use maps in one way or another.
You know how to declare, query, modify, and pass around maps as data
from one function to another.
You also learned something about the scaling performance of different
algorithms, such as linear search versus direct access, and the big-O
notation we use to talk about them: O(N) versus O(1), for example. That
means you understand when it makes sense to store data in a map instead of
a slice, which is useful.
And, importantly, you’re starting to get the hang of concurrent
programming in Go, since you now know what data races are, why they’re
a problem, and at least one way to avoid them. Great work! See you in the
next chapter.