9. Go go goroutines
Your brain is limited. I don’t mean any offence, you understand: your brain
is a wonderful instrument, and it’s just as good as anyone else’s, or perhaps
slightly better. But even the smartest brain can still only do one thing at
once, despite our constant and ineffectual attempts to multi-task with it…
…sorry, I was scrolling on my phone and lost the thread. But what if you
could do two things at once, or even more? What would that feel like? What
if you had two brains, for example? How would you organise them to work
on independent tasks? And how would you stop them interfering with each
other and making you very confused?
Well, your computer does have two brains. Actually, mine has—checks
notes—eighteen, though yours probably has more. And, even though I only
have eighteen “processing units”, I can run a lot more than eighteen
independent tasks: thousands, or even millions. How does that work? And
how would you ever write a program like that?
Understanding concurrencyWe’ve talked quite a bit in previous chapters about the careful way we need
to organise access to shared data in concurrent systems such as the
bookstore. But it’s all rather theoretical at the moment, since we haven’t
actually written any concurrent programs (unless you count running tests in
parallel).
Let’s go into this subject in a little more detail now, and talk about what
concurrency is and what problems it solves (or creates).
Multi-tasking
In the beginning, then, each computer could run one program at a time, and
it ran from the beginning to the end and that was that. But the earliest
computers were extremely expensive and, it turns out, they actually spent a
lot of their valuable time idle, for one reason or another.
For example, a typical task might be something like “read a few million
data records from punched cards or paper tape, compute some statistics
about them, and then write a report to a printer”. And, since physical
peripherals such as card readers and printers work very slowly compared to
the computer’s central processing unit (CPU) itself, a large part of the
running time of this program would be spent doing nothing but waiting for
these input / output (I/O) operations to finish. The actual computation part
would be over in a flash, relatively speaking.
It made financial as well as practical sense to come up with a scheme to
increase the CPU’s duty cycle: the proportion of the total running time it
spends doing useful work, as opposed to hanging around. Ideally, when the
CPU has nothing to do for a while on the current task, it should work on
some other task instead.
One great way to get more compute for your money is multi-tasking:
running more than one task at once. How might this work, then?
Time-sharingThe simplest and most obvious multi-tasking scheme is time-sharing:
maintain a queue of tasks, and give each task an equal chunk of time on the
CPU. When its time is up, the task gets paused and added to the back of the
queue, to eventually run again in its turn.
We can implement this idea with a pleasantly simple scheduler program.
The scheduler’s job is to figure out which task should run next. When its
time slice has elapsed, a timer interrupt will pause the task, and invoke the
scheduler again to pick the next one to run.
The scheduler’s logic is something like this:
1. Is there a queued task ready to run?
2. If so, start it.
3. If not, wait a while, and then go back to step 1.
Such a round-robin algorithm is easy to implement, but not very efficient,
because as we already saw, most tasks spend a lot of time blocked (that is,
waiting) on I/O operations. We don’t take any account of this, so even
though round-robining tasks reduces latency (average time to complete a
task), it doesn’t make much improvement to throughput (number of tasks
completed in a given time).
In fact, throughput might even get worse, because multi-tasking naturally
adds a scheduling overhead: the time that the CPU spends executing
scheduler code, and switching between different tasks, as opposed to
actually running task code.
Can we do better?
A co-operative scheduler
One nice improvement to our simple scheduler would be co-operative
multi-tasking: allowing a task to yield the CPU of its own accord when it
doesn’t have any useful computation to do for a while (for example, if it
just issued a request to read some data from disk).The scheduler program now gets a little more complicated, because it has
two queues to maintain, not one. Let’s call them the “ready queue” and the
“blocked queue”.
The ready queue contains tasks that could use the CPU if it were available.
When a new task is created (for example, when the user starts a program), it
will first of all be added to the back of the ready queue.
The blocked queue, on the other hand, contains tasks that have not yet
completed, but have nothing useful to do on the CPU at the moment:
they’re blocked. These tasks won’t be ready to run until some external
event unblocks them: perhaps a timer elapses, or an in-progress I/O request
completes. When this happens, the scheduler will move them to the ready
queue.
Meanwhile, the scheduler continues picking tasks from the ready queue and
giving them CPU time. Once a task has run to completion, the scheduler
can forget about it, freeing up the memory it was using to store the state of
that task.
Concurrent tasks
You could see this scheme as implementing a little state machine, where
any given task is always in one of three possible states:
New tasks start their life in the ready queue. If a task is running, but
becomes blocked, it moves to the blocked queue. When a blocked task
becomes unblocked, it moves to the ready queue. When it reaches the front
of the ready queue and a CPU is available, the task starts running. When a
task completes, the next ready task is scheduled in its place.The scheduler’s task is to move each task from one state to the next as
required. Indeed, the simpler the scheduler the better, because then we’re
not wasting too much valuable CPU time on merely figuring out which task
should run next.
Concurrency is not parallelism
We’ve been talking up to now about concurrent tasks sharing a single CPU,
and so it’s clear (I hope) that these tasks are not executing in parallel—that
is, simultaneously.
We speak loosely as though concurrency and parallelism were the same
thing, but they’re not. For example, I’m currently repainting the kitchen, but
I’m concurrently writing this book. Obviously I’m not doing these things
literally at the same time. But I’ve started both tasks, and finished neither of
them, so they’re concurrent (“running together”).
Now, if I were typing with one hand and wielding a paintbrush with the
other, that would be parallelism (and it would probably also make a bit of a
mess of both jobs). Fortunately, computers are better at this than we are,
and are in practically no danger of getting paint all over themselves.
Indeed, almost all modern computers have more than one CPU, and even
individual CPUs are often split up into multiple execution cores or
hardware threads, meaning that they can process several machine
instructions at once.
This multiprocessing (as opposed to multitasking) capability doesn’t change
our scheduling setup as much as you might think. We can still use a single
ready queue and a single blocked queue, but now more than one task can be
in the running state at once. Whenever a CPU becomes free, the scheduler
can assign it the next ready task, just as before.
For better efficiency, as well as a global queue, we can also maintain local
queues for each CPU, because it’s more expensive (that is, takes longer) to
move a task from one CPU to another than it is to reschedule that task on
the same CPU. A problem with multi-queueing is that one CPU could runout of work while others are still busy. To avoid this, a work-stealing
scheduler can grab tasks from other CPU queues when necessary.
Concurrency in Go
This is roughly how most concurrent computer systems work, and you’ll be
pleased to know that it’s the same in Go. When you compile and execute
your program, what’s actually happening is that the Go runtime is
scheduling a number of different goroutines—Go’s name for concurrent
tasks—to make the best use of your CPU.
If, as is likely, you have multiple CPUs, Go can schedule goroutines across
all of them, and the runtime will use work stealing to keep all your cores as
busy as possible. Thus, you can have concurrency and parallelism. Such
fun!
Goroutines
You might be surprised to learn that, in fact, all your Go programs so far
have been concurrent: they have multiple goroutines. At least one of them is
executing the Go code you’ve written, such as reading and listing the book
catalog. Others are doing housekeeping operations such as garbage
collection: identifying and recycling bits of memory that are no longer
required for your program.
We can ignore these “background” goroutines for now, and we’ll focus only
on the “main” goroutine: the one that executes your Go code. In this little
example, let’s call it “goroutine A”:
package main
 
import "fmt" 
 
func main() { 
    for i := range 10 { (Listing hello/3)
Ranging over integers
This is a use of for ... range that we haven’t seen before. Previously,
we’ve used the range keyword to create a loop that executes once for each
element of a slice or map. Here, though, we have a loop that executes a
fixed number of times (sometimes called “range over int”, since we use an
integer as the argument to range).
In this case, the loop executes 10 times:
Each time round the loop, i takes on the next value, so it goes 0, 1, 2, 3… 9.
Here’s the output:
Hello from goroutine A! 0 
Hello from goroutine A! 1 
Hello from goroutine A! 2 
Hello from goroutine A! 3 
... 
Hello from goroutine A! 9
The go statement
As we’ve seen, you get your first goroutine for free, just by running the
program. But you can also create new goroutines yourself. The keyword to
do this is easy to remember, because it’s the same as the name of the
language: go.
Let’s see what happens when we add another goroutine to our example,
using a go statement:
        fmt.Println("Hello from goroutine A!", i) 
    } 
}
for i := range 10 {Here’s the go statement that creates a new goroutine:
In Go, goroutines are function calls. So, to create one, we put the go
keyword in front of a function call such as goroutineB().
The goroutine that never was
It looks as though this program will have two goroutines, A and B, each
printing its own set of ten messages. What will we see when we run it? Will
we see all of A’s messages, followed by all of B’s messages, or vice versa,
or will we see them interleaved? Let’s find out:
package main
 
import ( 
    "fmt" 
) 
 
func goroutineB() { 
    for i := range 10 { 
        fmt.Println("Hello from goroutine B!", i) 
    } 
} 
 
func main() { 
    go goroutineB() 
    for i := range 10 { 
        fmt.Println("Hello from goroutine A!", i) 
    } 
}
go goroutineB()go run
Hello from goroutine A! 0 
Hello from goroutine A! 1 
Hello from goroutine A! 2 
Hello from goroutine A! 3 
... 
Hello from goroutine A! 9
Well, that was weird! It looks like goroutine B didn’t run at all. Why not?
Starvation
Recall that we said goroutines can be in one of three states: running,
blocked, or ready. So, at the beginning of main, there is only goroutine A,
and not surprisingly it’s in the running state.
Then we come to the go statement:
This asks the scheduler to create a new goroutine whose task is to run the
function goroutineB. But, since goroutine A is currently running, and
doesn’t yet need to block for any reason, the go statement just causes the
new goroutine to be added to the ready queue.
Remember, the scheduler doesn’t even look at the ready queue unless the
currently running goroutine either finishes or blocks for some reason. And
goroutine A still has useful work to do, printing its ten messages.
And when goroutine A reaches the end of its for loop, it then exits the main
function, and that’s the end of the program! Poor goroutine B is still sitting
in the ready queue, waiting for its chance to run, which will now never
come (it has starved, in the jargon).
New goroutines start in the ready queue
go goroutineB()We’ve learned something useful and interesting about Go concurrency
already. You might have thought that a program would wait until all its
goroutines have run to completion, but that turns out not to be the case.
Instead, the program exits as soon as some goroutine gets to the end of the 
main function. If there are goroutines waiting in the ready and blocked
queues, that’s too bad: they get terminated along with the rest of the
program.
If a running goroutine has useful work to do and it never blocks or
deliberately yields the CPU, then no other goroutines will ever run. Go
multitasking is solely co-operative, in other words (there are some minor
footnotes to this, but we needn’t bother with them for now).
You might perfectly well imagine that the go statement would pause the
current goroutine and start the new one running straight away, but that turns
out not to be the case either. Instead, the go statement merely adds the new
task to the ready queue, to be run at some point in the future (if it ever gets
the chance).
You can think of the go keyword as meaning, not “run this now”, but “run
this later… maybe!” In the meantime, the current goroutine continues
executing as long as it can.
Being the scheduler
By the way, there’s a useful technique for figuring out why a concurrent
program isn’t behaving the way you expected. I call it “being the
scheduler”. Go through the code, as we’ve just done, asking yourself at
every point what goroutines exist and what state each of them is in. Look
for go statements creating new goroutines, and blocking operations that
cause state transitions.
If you do this carefully and methodically, you’ll be able to understand the
behaviour of any concurrent program, and most importantly, its possible
misbehaviour. For example, we diagnosed the problem with our “hello
goroutine” program as one of starvation: even though we created goroutine
B, it never had a chance to run before the program ended.Yielding with time.Sleep
If we want to see evidence of both goroutines running, we need to make
sure that each of them regularly yields the CPU, allowing the other to run.
The simplest way to do that is to pause them using the time.Sleep function,
from the time package:
It doesn’t really matter how long we pause for: pausing for any time at all
will block the goroutine and trigger the scheduler to run the next task in its
ready queue.
You might easily assume, when you see a statement like time.Sleep, that it
would cause the current goroutine to stay on the CPU and wait, spinning its
wheels, so to speak, until the desired time has elapsed. But that’s not
actually what happens, because in a multi-tasking system, it would be a
waste of CPU time.
As long as there are other goroutines in the ready queue, meaning that they
have useful work to do on the CPU, the scheduler can and will put them
into action.
Meanwhile, the goroutine calling time.Sleep will be parked: it joins the
blocked queue and stays there until the timer expires. At that point it will go
back into the ready queue.
Interleaved goroutines
Here’s what the program looks like with a time.Sleep added to each loop:
time.Sleep(10 * time.Millisecond)
package main
 
import ( 
    "fmt" (Listing hello/4)
Let’s run it again:
Hello from goroutine A! 0 
Hello from goroutine B! 0 
Hello from goroutine B! 1 
Hello from goroutine A! 1 
Hello from goroutine B! 2 
Hello from goroutine A! 2 
Hello from goroutine A! 3 
Hello from goroutine B! 3 
... 
Hello from goroutine A! 9 
Hello from goroutine B! 9
That’s more like it. The messages from each goroutine are interleaved,
showing that their execution overlaps. We can see from this output that
    "time" 
) 
 
func goroutineB() { 
    for i := range 10 { 
        fmt.Println("Hello from goroutine B!", i) 
        time.Sleep(10 * time.Millisecond) 
    } 
} 
 
func main() { 
    go goroutineB() 
    for i := range 10 { 
        fmt.Println("Hello from goroutine A!", i) 
        time.Sleep(10 * time.Millisecond) 
    } 
}goroutine A runs a loop iteration or two, followed by goroutine B, then
back to A for a bit, and so on.
How long each goroutine runs in its turn on the CPU depends what other
goroutines (such as the garbage collector) are doing, how busy your CPU is
with other programs on your computer, and various other factors. We can’t
know in advance exactly what the output of a program like this will be, only
that the two goroutines will run concurrently.
Data sharing and data races
Being able to run two functions at the same time is neat, but not all that
impressive: after all, you could already run two Go programs at the same
time using the multitasking features provided by your operating system.
The really useful thing about Go concurrency is that the goroutines in a
single program can share data with each other. That’s because, as you
already know, Go functions can access shared data, such as a package-level
variable.
A shared variable
For example, let’s modify this program so that each goroutine prints the
value of a shared package-level variable message:
var message = "Hello" 
 
func goroutineB() { 
    for range 10 { 
        fmt.Println(message, "from goroutine B!") 
        time.Sleep(10 * time.Millisecond) 
    } 
} 
 
func main() { (Listing hello/5)
Here’s the output:
Hello from goroutine A! 
Hello from goroutine B! 
Hello from goroutine B! 
... 
Hello from goroutine A!
Racing goroutines
Now that we have multiple goroutines accessing the same data, our safety
antennae should be quivering about the possibility of a data race. So, does a
data race exist in this program?
In the previous chapter we saw that the requirements of a data race are,
first, that multiple goroutines are accessing a variable, and second, that at
least one of those accesses is a write. We’re safe for now, because all our
accesses are reads; no writes.
Let’s live a little dangerously, then. If we have one of our goroutines modify
the message variable, then we should have a data race, according to the
rules. We’ll change goroutine B as follows:
    go goroutineB() 
    for range 10 { 
        fmt.Println(message, "from goroutine A!") 
        time.Sleep(10 * time.Millisecond) 
    } 
}
func goroutineB() { 
    message = "Goodbye" 
    for range 10 { 
        fmt.Println(message, "from goroutine B!") (Listing hello/6)
So, when goroutine B runs for the first time, it will set message to the string 
"Goodbye". Let’s see what the output looks like:
Hello from goroutine A! 
Goodbye from goroutine B! 
Goodbye from goroutine B! 
Goodbye from goroutine A! 
... 
Goodbye from goroutine B!
Fair enough. For a given iteration of goroutine A, then, will it print “Hello”
or “Goodbye”? The answer is that we can’t know in advance, and that’s the
significance of a data race. The output of goroutine A depends in this case
on whether or not goroutine B has ever executed, and that in turn depends
on what goroutine A does.
Data races in concurrent systems
What are the consequences of this kind of problem for our bookstore? Let’s
suppose again that we have two point-of-sale terminals, both accessing the
same book catalog concurrently. And let’s suppose that two customers are
both trying to buy the last copy of the same book.
We haven’t written a program to do this yet, but let’s imagine there’s a
command called buy that, among other things, checks the stock level of the
given book and decreases it by 1. If you try to buy abc when there are zero
copies of book abc in stock, clearly that can’t succeed, so you get an error
message saying “sorry, out of stock”.
So, if there’s initially one copy of abc in the catalog, then what happens
when customers A and B both concurrently try to buy it? In theory, one of
them must win the race: if customer A is a microsecond ahead of customer
        time.Sleep(10 * time.Millisecond) 
    } 
}B in placing their order, then they’ll get the last copy, and the second
attempt to buy abc will fail because there are now zero copies left.
But in practice, computer systems store temporary copies of data in cache
memory, just as our Catalog stores a temporary copy of the book data
represented by the disk file. In multi-CPU systems, each CPU has its own
little chunk of cache containing a copy of the part of memory that the CPU
is currently accessing. We can imagine that our bookstore terminals might
use a similar kind of cache arrangement.
For this scheme to work, changes to the cache have to be re-synced with the
definitive data in memory every so often, just as we have to call Sync to
reconcile the memory catalog with the disk catalog. But in the meantime,
some other CPU might have also made changes to its own cached copy of
the catalog.
Double access problems
Here’s what could happen with our duelling customers:
1. Customer A runs buy abc, setting the number of copies of abc in its
local cache of the catalog to zero. But customer B also has a cached
version of the catalog that now disagrees with customer A’s version,
because it still says there is one copy of abc, instead of zero.
2. Concurrently, customer B runs buy abc. This succeeds because, as far
as B’s cache is concerned, there’s still one copy of abc left in the
catalog.
3. Both customer A and customer B’s caches now agree again.
Specifically, they agree that there should be zero copies of abc in the
catalog, so there’s no conflict, and the system doesn’t detect any
problem.
4. But there is a problem! Only one of the two customers can walk out of
the store with the book. Yet they’ve both bought and paid for it, and
the bookstore system failed to prevent the same copy from being sold
twice.What can we do about this?
Detecting races
Let’s write a Go program that demonstrates a simple version of the
duelling-customers problem, and then we’ll see if we can detect and fix it.
Clash of the customers
We’ll represent each customer by a goroutine, and each goroutine will
attempt to “buy” the same book by decrementing a shared copies variable:
(Listing copies/1)
Here, we’re setting up a variable copies, representing the number of copies
of the book in stock. It starts at 1.
func main() { 
    copies := 1 
    go func() { 
        if copies > 0 { 
            copies-- 
            fmt.Println("Customer A got the book") 
        } 
    }() 
    go func() { 
        if copies > 0 { 
            copies-- 
            fmt.Println("Customer B got the book") 
        } 
    }() 
    time.Sleep(time.Second) 
}Next, we create two goroutines, representing customers A and B, each of
which does the same thing: it checks to see if copies is greater than zero,
and if so, it “buys” the book by setting copies to zero and printing a
message saying which customer got it.
In total, then, we have three goroutines now, including the main goroutine,
which does nothing but call time.Sleep, to give the two “customer”
goroutines a chance to run, and to make sure the program doesn’t end too
soon.
Anonymous function literals
There’s a couple of new pieces of syntax here. Instead of using the go
statement to call some named function in a new goroutine, we give it what’s
called a function literal:
This is exactly equivalent to defining the same function with a name, as
we’ve done before, and calling it in the go statement:
It’s usually a little easier to see what’s going on if we put the goroutine code
directly in a function literal, rather than abstracting it out into a named
function. And since this function has no name, it’s sometimes called an
anonymous function literal, or, in the jargon, a closure.
Increment and decrement statements
Here’s another new Go construct: a decrement statement. Each of the two
goroutines does this:
go func() { ... }()
func customerB() { ... } 
... 
go customerB()The -- operator in the decrement statement subtracts 1 from the value of the
variable it’s applied to. It’s a shorter way of writing the exactly equivalent:
Or even:
There is, naturally, enough, a corresponding increment statement, using ++,
which we would write like this:
Demonstrating the race
When this program runs, then, the two customer goroutines should both get
a chance to run, and they will race each other for access to copies.
Sometimes customer A will get there first, and at other times, customer B:
the result should be more or less random.
Let’s see what happens when we run this program ten times in a row, then:
Customer B got the book 
Customer A got the book 
Customer A got the book 
Customer B got the book 
Customer A got the book 
Customer B got the book 
Customer B got the book 
Customer B got the book 
Customer A got the book 
Customer A got the book
copies--
copies = copies - 1
copies -= 1
copies++We already knew that a data race is present here in theory, because there are
multiple goroutines accessing the same variable, and at least one of those
accesses is a write. But now we’ve demonstrated the race in practice: we
can’t tell in advance whether customer A or B will get the book. The
outcome of the program is non-deterministic, in other words.
And we know that in a more realistic simulation of a multi-user system that
includes cacheing, a data race means that we can get undesirable results
such as both customers apparently purchasing the same copy.
Go’s race detector
Go has a useful tool to help us here, called the race detector. If we use the -
race flag with the go command, the Go runtime will use the race detector to
find and report any data races in the program.
We feel it should report one here, so let’s find out:
go run -race main.go
Customer B got the book 
================== 
WARNING: DATA RACE 
Read at 0x00c000090038 by goroutine 6: 
  main.main.func1() 
      .../love/copies/1/main.go:11 +0x2c 
 
Previous write at 0x00c000090038 by goroutine 7: 
  main.main.func2() 
      .../love/copies/1/main.go:18 +0x50 
 
Goroutine 6 (running) created at: 
  main.main() 
      .../love/copies/1/main.go:10 +0xa0 
 
Goroutine 7 (running) created at: 
  main.main() 
      .../love/copies/1/main.go:16 +0x104 
================== 
Found 1 data race(s) 
exit status 66Understanding the output
We know from the definition of a data race that there must be at least one
write to the variable and at least one other conflicting access, and indeed
that’s the case. Here’s where the write occurs:
Previous write... by goroutine 7: 
  main.main.func2() 
      .../love/copies/1/main.go:18
That’s referring to this line in the customer B goroutine (“goroutine 7”,
according to the arbitrary numbering scheme used by the runtime):
Customer B is trying to decrement copies, thus updating the value of the
variable, but this is conflicting with a concurrent read by the customer A
goroutine (“goroutine 6”):
Read... by goroutine 6: 
  main.main.func1() 
      .../love/copies/1/main.go:11
That refers to this line in the customer A goroutine:
So, customer A is trying to read the variable, while customer B is
concurrently trying to write to it. Go has successfully detected the data race
in this program. It’s a good idea to always use the -race flag when you test
programs with multiple goroutines, just to make sure you haven’t missed
any potential races.
If the race detector is so super-terrific, you might ask, then why isn’t it just
turned on all the time? The answer is that it works by adding
instrumentation to every piece of data in your program to check if it’s being
accessed concurrently. Those checks slow down the program a lot, so we
copies--
if copies > 0 {wouldn’t want them enabled when running the program for real, but they
remain very useful for testing.
Mutual exclusion and locking
In the previous chapter we explored one way of preventing data races, by
using a mutex. Let’s see if that helps here, too.
Adding a mutex
Here’s an updated version of our example program, this time with a 
sync.Mutex which we’ll use to protect the copies variable from concurrent
access:
func main() { 
    var mu sync.Mutex 
    copies := 1 
    go func() { 
        mu.Lock() 
        defer mu.Unlock() 
        if copies > 0 { 
            copies-- 
            fmt.Println("Customer A got the book") 
        } 
    }() 
    go func() { 
        mu.Lock() 
        defer mu.Unlock() 
        if copies > 0 { 
            copies-- 
            fmt.Println("Customer B got the book") 
        } 
    }() (Listing copies/2)
The “lock, defer unlock” pattern
Everything is the same as before except that now we have an extra variable 
mu, the mutex. Here’s the customer A goroutine (customer B’s is identical
except for the printed message):
If the mutex scheme is going to work, then each goroutine has to obtain the
lock before trying to read the copies variable. That’s what mu.Lock() does.
If the lock is available, great: we’ll obtain it and proceed straight away. If
it’s in use by someone else, the call to mu.Lock() will wait until it’s released
(that is, the calling goroutine will move to the blocked queue until the lock
becomes available).
Once the goroutine has got the lock (and made it back to the front of the
ready queue, if it had to wait in the meantime), it can proceed. We then 
defer the call to mu.Unlock(), ensuring that whatever happens in this
goroutine, we release the lock when the function exits.
Taking the token
The sequence of events for each goroutine will be:
    time.Sleep(time.Second) 
}
mu.Lock() 
defer mu.Unlock() 
if copies > 0 { 
    copies--
    fmt.Println("Customer A got the book") 
}1. Obtain lock (blocking if necessary).
2. Read copies.
3. If the book is still available, set copies to zero.
4. Release lock.
This time, at step 3, the book can only be available to exactly one of the
goroutines. The two critical sections (steps 2-3 in each goroutine) can no
longer overlap: that’s what the mutex prevents.
It’s a little like a single-track railway line, where only one train can safely
occupy a given section of line at a time. If two trains try to share it,
especially when they’re travelling in opposite directions, it’s usually a bad
day for everyone concerned. To prevent this, we need a way to enforce
mutual exclusion of trains in each block (the equivalent of our critical
section).
One typical scheme relies on a physical token that the train driver has to
obtain before entering the block. On reaching the other end of the block, the
driver hands the token back to a signaller, so that it can be used by the next
train, and so on. Mechanical interlocking prevents the points and signals
being set for any train movement until the corresponding token is in place.
The mutex in our example program is the digital equivalent of the token:
each goroutine must wait until the token is available, signalling that it can
enter the critical section. Once it leaves, it gives up the token so that other
goroutines can use it to enter their own critical sections.
A race-free program with locking
In our book example, the critical section starts where the goroutine reads 
copies, and ends after it (optionally) writes to the same variable. So, before
the goroutine enters this section, it must obtain the “token”, by calling 
mu.Lock(). After it leaves, it gives up the token by calling mu.Unlock() (via
a defer statement).
One of two things has to happen, then: either the customer A routine gets
the lock first and updates copies, meaning that customer B misses out, or
the customer B goroutine gets the lock first, and customer A misses out.Access to the copies variable is guaranteed by the lock to be mutually
exclusive, eliminating the data race. Let’s see if the race detector agrees:
go run -race main.go
Customer B got the book
No data race warning. That’s great! It looks like we can fix the books
package using a mutex to prevent data races. Let’s go ahead and make this
upgrade in the next chapter.
Here’s what we know so far
In this chapter we’ve talked about some simple multi-tasking and
scheduling algorithms, and seen how these inform the design of Go’s
scheduler. You know how to use the go keyword to create and schedule new
goroutines, which are concurrent tasks executing Go functions.
You’ve written some simple programs involving multiple goroutines, and
seen how they move between ready, running, and blocked states, by means
of the scheduler. You can reason about the behaviour of concurrent
programs and how data races arise when goroutines share access to
variables.
You also learned how to use a sync.Mutex to protect a shared variable from
concurrent access, and how to obtain and release the lock in goroutines.