11. Your server for tonight
Thanks to you, Happy Fun Books is well on the way to becoming a thriving
business. That means lots of customers, lots of branches, and lots of sales
terminals in each branch. And, as we’ve seen, that also means concurrent
access to the catalog data.
Each terminal will need to be able to do things like query the catalog for a
certain book, add a new book, or update the details for a book. And, since
there can be only one definitive version of the catalog, that information will
have to live and be stored on one central computer—our server—which
also needs to be able to receive and process the queries from multiple
clients.
A client/server protocol
So, how can we make this work? You’ve probably heard of a networking
standard called TCP/IP (Transmission Control Protocol / Internet Protocol);
it’s the basis of the internet. The name makes it sound complicated, but it’s
quite straightforward in principle.Low-level: TCP/IP
We all understand the phone system, for example. When you want to talk to
someone, you place a call to their number, and if it succeeds, you now have
a two-way connection, and you can chat to your heart’s content. It’s just the
same with TCP/IP: you dial the computer you want to talk to, using a
unique number called its address. If the other party answers, then you have
a connection, and it lasts until one of you decides to hang up.
TCP/IP is a relatively low-level protocol: all it does is set up a two-way
connection over which you can send arbitrary data back and forth, as bytes.
It doesn’t assign any particular structure or meaning to those bytes, so you
can have any kind of conversation you want, just like with a phone call. As
long as both ends speak the same language, they can understand each other.
For our bookstore, we need to support only a fairly restricted kind of
conversation: one where the terminal sends a request (“tell me about book 
abc”) and the server sends a response (“here are the details of abc”).
High-level: HTTP
Fortunately, there’s already a well-established protocol for doing exactly
this sort of thing over TCP/IP connections, called HTTP (HyperText
Transfer Protocol). Just as TCP/IP defines the internet, HTTP defines what
we call the World-Wide Web, or just “the web” for short—and it’s also now
used for many other things, as we’ll see.
Here’s what a typical HTTP request might look like, if you were to spy on
the bytes as they whizzed past:
GET /hello HTTP/1.1 
Host: example.com 
User-Agent: curl/8.6.0 
Accept: */*
HTTP requestsAn HTTP request is the standard way for a client to ask a server for a
certain resource. This one starts with the word GET:
GET /hello HTTP/1.1
It’s asking the server “Please can I GET the following?”. Then it identifies
the specific resource it wants: /hello. This is a slash-separated path, very
similar to the way we address specific disk files using a path. Officially, it’s
called a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI).
The GET line ends with HTTP/1.1, which means “I’m speaking HTTP
protocol version 1.1, how about you?” Including the version number is
important, because it means the protocol can be changed over time. A
server can tell from the client’s HTTP version what features it supports, and
vice versa.
Then come some headers: a series of key-value pairs containing metadata
about the request, one per line, like this:
Host: example.com
Here, the header name is Host, and the value is example.com. The Host
header tells the server which hostname—which server name—the client
thinks it’s talking to. You might wonder why this is necessary, since the
client is already connected to the host. The answer is that a single server can
serve multiple websites, distinguished by their different hostnames. The 
Host header tells the server which one the client is interested in.
The request also identifies the specific program, or user agent that’s
sending it:
User-Agent: curl/8.6.0
In this case, it’s the curl command-line tool. And the Accept header sets out
what kinds of resources the client is interested in:
Accept: */*
Here, */* means “everything; no restrictions”.We don’t need to worry about any of these headers for our purposes, as we
won’t be using them, but it’s helpful to know what they mean.
HTTP responses
Here’s what a typical response might look like:
HTTP/1.1 200 OK 
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8 
Date: Fri, 21 Jun 2025 14:18:33 GMT 
Last-Modified: Thu, 17 Oct 2024 07:18:26 GMT
Content-Length: 1234 
 
<!doctype html> 
<html><head><title>Hello, world</title></head> 
...
The server’s response begins by saying what protocol version it’s using: 
HTTP/1.1—“Yes, I’m speaking HTTP version 1.1 too, nice to meet you.”
This first line also includes a status code indicating, essentially, whether the
request succeeded or failed:
200 OK
It’s the number that matters here, as far as HTTP clients are concerned; the
text that follows is for the benefit of any humans who might be reading.
Another possible status code, for example, might be 404 Not Found, if the
requested resource doesn’t exist.
The numbers are arbitrary, and there are lots of different status codes, but in
general a 2xx code means the request succeeded, 4xx means there was
something wrong with the request, and 5xx means there was something
wrong on the server’s end.
These codes cover a wide range of possible outcomes, including 418 I'm a 
teapot, which exists primarily for comedy purposes. Engineering can be a
dry business, and it’s important to keep your sense of humour.
200 OK, as in this example, means “Sure, that’s no trouble: please find the
requested resource attached”.Then there are some headers, conveying metadata about the resource.
These include things like its content type (what kind of data it represents,
and the specific character encoding used), the time it was retrieved, the time
it was last modified, and how many bytes long it is:
Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8 
Date: Fri, 21 Jun 2025 14:18:33 GMT 
Last-Modified: Thu, 17 Oct 2024 07:18:26 GMT
Content-Length: 1234
The resource data itself follows. In this case, it’s a document beginning:
<!doctype html> 
<html><head><title>Hello, world</title></head> 
...
This happens to be HTML, the markup language used for hypertext
documents on the web, but the details of that don’t concern us for now.
We’re just interested in how to use HTTP to request or retrieve any
resource, whether it’s an HTML document or something else.
An abstract request/response protocol
HTTP itself doesn’t care what the resource is, either. As far as the protocol
is concerned, it’s just a bunch of bytes. The Content-Type header gives the
client a hint about how to interpret those bytes: as text, for example.
The job of HTTP is to provide a standard format for the request / response
exchange between client and server, where resources are identified by a
slash-separated path, and consist of arbitrary data.
I expect you’ve used one of the most popular kinds of HTTP clients: a web
browser, which you can use to visit such interesting sites as 
bitfieldconsulting.com. The resources on these sites are served by a
specific kind of HTTP server called a web server, logically enough.
But we can also write HTTP client and server programs of our own. Rather
than serving HTML documents, graphics, or videos to be displayed in a
browser, we can serve, and consume, any kind of data we want. Forexample, we could use HTTP to request and respond with book information
from the bookstore catalog.
A simple HTTP server in Go
By now you won’t be surprised to hear that Go provides excellent support
for HTTP as part of the standard library, in the net/http package. In fact,
we can write a simple HTTP server program with very little code indeed.
Let’s do just that.
http.ListenAndServe
Here’s our first draft. I’m going to put it in a subfolder named cmd/server,
to distinguish it from the various other commands we’ve written so far.
Here’s the main.go file:
(Listing hello/7)
package main
 
import ( 
    "fmt" 
    "net/http" 
) 
 
func main() { 
    http.ListenAndServe(":3000", http.HandlerFunc(hello)) 
} 
 
func hello(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) { 
    fmt.Fprintln(w, "Hello, world") 
}It’s a relatively short program, but it does a lot. First, we import the 
net/http package. Then, in the main function, we start an HTTP server
with:
ListenAndServe, as the name implies, listens for connections (in the same
way that you might listen for the phone to ring). When a connection is
made, and the connecting client sends an HTTP request, then the server
serves it: that is, it responds with the requested resource (or an error, if
appropriate). We’ll see how that works in a minute.
Addresses, hosts, and port numbers
First, though, we have to tell the server its address (its phone number, if you
like), so that it knows where to listen for incoming connections. This is the
first argument to ListenAndServe:
:3000
TCP/IP addresses usually consist of two parts: the host address and the port
number, separated by a colon:
HOST:PORT
The host address identifies the particular computer (like a phone number).
In order to support more than one connection at a time, it also includes a
port number (like an office extension number, perhaps).
In our example, we omitted the host address part altogether, which is
allowed when listening for connections: by default, we’ll just listen on
whatever our address happens to be. We did, however, give a specific port
number: 3000. That number doesn’t have any particular significance. I just
chose a round number at random that’s unlikely to already be in use (that’s
good enough for now, but we’ll see how to improve on this later).
Handlers, ResponseWriter, and Request
http.ListenAndServe(":3000", ...)The HTTP server is now listening for incoming connections to port 3000.
When it gets one, it will invoke some handler function to deal with it. The
handler we’ve specified in this example is:
hello is a function defined in our program:
(Listing hello/7)
All HTTP handler functions take these two parameters: a ResponseWriter
object and a Request pointer. The Request is not used in our example, since
the handler always sends the same response, whatever the request.
How do we send that response? That’s what the ResponseWriter object is
for. In effect, it represents the connection back to the client. It’s a conduit
for any data that we want to send in response to the request, like this:
You may not have seen the fmt.Fprintln function before, but it does
exactly the same job as our old friend fmt.Println. The only difference is
that, whereas Println always prints to the terminal, Fprintln can print to
any destination we specify. In this case it’s w, the parameter representing the
ResponseWriter.
You might wonder why this is necessary: why don’t we just use Println
here? The answer is that Println would print its message to the terminal on
the computer where the server program is running. But the whole point of
an HTTP server is to be able to send messages over the network, to some
remote client. The w parameter represents our connection to that client, so
http.HandlerFunc(hello)
func hello(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) { 
    fmt.Fprintln(w, "Hello, world") 
}
fmt.Fprintln(w, "Hello, world")we can use it with Fprintln to send messages to them instead of the local
terminal.
ListenAndServe listens forever
Let’s look again at the main function that actually starts the server:
(Listing hello/7)
You might be wondering why the program wouldn’t simply exit straight
away when http.ListenAndServe returns. That’s a great question, and the
answer is that it would! But http.ListenAndServe doesn’t return, as a matter
of fact (unless there’s some fatal error).
Instead, it just listens and serves. It keeps on listening and serving
essentially forever, or until we get bored and switch off the computer, or
otherwise terminate the program.
Trying out the server
Let’s go ahead and run the program, then. What output does it produce?
go run ./cmd/server
...
Nothing to see here! But then, if you think about it, that’s what we should
expect. We’ve asked the program to sit and wait for connections, and that’s
all it’s doing.
To see if the server is actually serving, then, let’s make an HTTP request to
it. We can use the curl tool for this (if you don’t have it installed, you could
use a web browser instead).
func main() { 
    http.ListenAndServe(":3000", http.HandlerFunc(hello)) 
}curl localhost:3000
Hello, world
The special host address localhost, by the way, means exactly what it
sounds like. It refers to the local host, in other words this computer that
we’re typing on. And you know what the :3000 part means already: it
identifies port 3000 on that host.
Concurrent connections
It looks like the server accepted the connection, and responded with the
message we expected. This successful exchange of request and response is
only the beginning, though. We can keep on requesting the “Hello, world”
message as many times as we like, and the server will happily supply it for
us.
In fact, though it isn’t apparent here, the server supports concurrent
connections. If there were hundreds or thousands of clients all sending
requests at once, they wouldn’t each have to queue up and wait their turn.
Instead, the server automatically starts as many goroutines as necessary to
serve all the requests concurrently. That’s one reason Go is such a popular
language for writing network services: it makes this kind of scaling easy.
Once again we’ve written a concurrent Go program without that
concurrency necessarily being obvious. Even though there’s no go statement
visible in our source code, this program potentially has lots of goroutines:
one for each connection. (There is a go statement, in fact, but it’s hidden
away inside the implementation of ListenAndServe, so you don’t have to
write it yourself.)
A simple HTTP client in Go
This is encouraging news for our bookstore project. We wanted to write a
program that would be able to concurrently serve catalog information to
multiple sales terminals, and now we have a way to do it. We can use anHTTP server to listen for requests about books and respond to them with
data from the catalog.
http.Get
Writing the server is one half of the problem, but we also need client
programs. These are also fairly easy to write in Go. Let’s make another new
program, this time in cmd/client:
package main
 
import ( 
    "fmt" 
    "io" 
    "net/http" 
) 
 
func main() { 
    resp, err := http.Get("http://localhost:3000") 
    if err != nil { 
        panic(err) 
    } 
    defer resp.Body.Close() 
    if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusOK { 
        panic(resp.StatusCode) 
    } 
    msg, err := io.ReadAll(resp.Body) 
    if err != nil { 
        panic(err) 
    } 
    fmt.Printf("%s", msg) 
}(Listing hello/7)
Don’t bridle too indignantly at the use of panic to handle all errors here:
this is just sketch code to prove the concept. We can and will do better in
the real program, but the interesting bit here is how we make the HTTP
request.
To do this, we call http.Get. As the name suggests, it makes an HTTP GET
request for us, just like the one we made with the curl tool earlier:
URLs
You’ll recognise the argument to Get as a Uniform Resource Locator
(URL), which is HTTP’s way of specifying some particular resource, on a
particular host. It has four parts, some of them optional:
PROTOCOL://HOST:PORT/URI
And here’s the URL we’re requesting:
http://localhost:3000
In this case the protocol, unsurprisingly, is http. There are other protocols,
but we don’t care about them just now.
The host and port are localhost:3000, which identifies our little server.
We’ve omitted the optional URI part, so we’re implicitly requesting the
default URI, which is /. As we saw earlier, a URI is a slash-separated path
identifying some resource in a tree, and the tree starts at /, the top-level
resource.
http.Get will try to make this request for us, but, as the err return suggests,
this could fail. The URL might be invalid in some way, or maybe we can’t
contact the specified host, or there’s no server listening at the specified
resp, err := http.Get("http://localhost:3000")address. All sorts of things could go wrong, indeed: the net is dark and full
of errors.
Assuming there’s no error this time, though, we’ll get an object representing
the server’s response. In this program, we name it resp:
(Listing hello/7)
The response status code
This object, whose type is http.Response, is a struct containing all the data
about the response, but we’re usually only interested in one or two of its
fields.
The first thing we need to look at is the status code, which as we saw in the
earlier example, will be 200 if the request was successful. Any other status
means something has gone wrong, so we need the program to bail out.
To do this, we could have written:
This is numerically correct, but it’s not clear to the reader what’s going on
unless they happen to know that “200” means “OK” (because of course it
does!) To avoid using such a “magic number” in the code, we can use one
of the predefined status constants, such as http.StatusOK:
(Perhaps less usefully, we could also have compared it against 
http.StatusTeapot; when engineers do decide to indulge themselves in a
joke, they really lean into it.)
resp, err := http.Get("http://localhost:3000")
if resp.StatusCode != 200 {
if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusOK {The response body
If we get a response with “OK” status, that means we can now look at the
response body: the payload containing the actual data we asked for. This is 
resp.Body. We read the data from it, and print the result:
You might wonder why we can’t simply print resp.Body directly. That’s
because resp.Body is what’s called a reader: an abstraction that we can read
data from, byte by byte. This is a useful abstraction in Go because there are
lots of different types of things that we can read bytes from: files, response
bodies, network connections, and many more.
And just as we did with a file object in an earlier chapter, we use defer to
make sure that the body reader gets closed once we’re done with it:
io.Reader and io.ReadAll
The reader abstraction—which is defined in the io package as io.Reader—
lets us write code that can read data from any of these various types. You
can probably guess what the io.ReadAll function does with a reader, then: it
reads all of it!
If there’s no error during the reading process, then what we end up with in 
msg is the contents of the response body, which we print as a string:
msg, err := io.ReadAll(resp.Body) 
... 
fmt.Printf("%s", msg)
defer resp.Body.Close()
msg, err := io.ReadAll(resp.Body) 
... 
fmt.Printf("%s", msg)Trying out the client
That’s our very basic HTTP client program; let’s run it and see what
happens.
go run ./cmd/client
panic: Get "http://localhost:3000": dial tcp [::1]:3000: connect: 
connection refused
Whoops. “Connection refused” means there’s no server accepting
connections on port 3000. That’s because I forgot that we need to have the
server program already running beforehand. To do that, I’ll open another
terminal and run it there:
go run ./cmd/server
...
I’ll leave that terminal open with the server program still running, switch
back to my other terminal, and run the client program again:
go run ./cmd/client
Hello, world
We now have two Go programs talking to each other over HTTP. This is
encouraging!
A networked bookstore API
Now that we know how to write at least the simplest HTTP clients and
servers in Go, let’s start thinking about how to add HTTP support to the 
books package.
One starting point would be to create a new program to act as an HTTP
server, serving book information from a single central host. Then we could
take our existing “point of sale” programs such as list and find and turnthem into clients of this HTTP server. That way, we could share a single
book catalog to any number of computers on the bookstore network (or, in
principle, anywhere on the internet).
A service like this is known as a network API, and it’s the same term we
encountered earlier in this book for the interface to a software abstraction or
a library package such as books. That’s no coincidence, because an API
server makes an abstraction API available to programs over the network,
not just on the local computer. We’ll be taking our existing Happy Fun
Books API and making it available over the network.
A networked list program
That sounds like a complicated task, but it’s really only a matter of gluing
together bits of code that we already have. For example, think about using
the list client to request information about all the books in the catalog.
The client could make an HTTP request along the lines of “get all books”,
and the server could send the catalog information in its response, encoded
into bytes in some way. We can use whatever encoding we like, but it so
happens that we’ve already written code to serialise the catalog as JSON (in
the Sync method), so let’s use JSON.
The client will need to decode this response data into a slice of Book objects,
but again, we’ve already more or less solved that problem (in the 
OpenCatalog function).
As a proof of concept, then, let’s try to write the simplest server (and client)
that will implement a networked list operation.
As always, we’ll start with a test. Let’s see if we can write a test that starts a
book server, makes an HTTP request asking it to list the catalog, and then
checks that the response contains the expected data.
Again, there’s nothing here we haven’t done before in one form or another.
The challenge now will be to put these elements together in the right way,
and we’ll go step by step.First, we need to start the server, and we need to do that concurrently, so
that the test can continue and make an HTTP request. As you’ll recall, we
can use a go statement to create a new goroutine. Something like this should
work:
To start the server, we would ideally just call a single function, similar to 
http.ListenAndServe, specifying the address to listen on:
Then there’s the question of which book catalog the server should serve.
Every store will have a different catalog, so it would be convenient if we
could pass this as an extra argument to our ListenAndServe function:
Handling startup errors
http.ListenAndServe usually doesn’t return, as we’ve seen, but if it does
it’s because there’s an error. For example, it might not able to listen on the
requested address, perhaps because it’s already in use.
Our function will need to be able to return such errors too. If it returns,
there’s some problem that means we won’t be able to run the test, so we’d
better handle that by bailing out with panic:
go func() { 
    ... // start server 
}() 
... // make request
books.ListenAndServe(":3000")
catalog := getTestCatalog() 
catalog.Path = t.TempDir() + "/catalog" 
go func() { 
    books.ListenAndServe(":3000", catalog) 
}()Making the request
Now let’s make the request:
More or less the same code that we had in our primitive “client” program.
And the next part will be roughly the same too: check the HTTP status code
to see whether the request was successful.
If we get past this point, we know that we successfully connected to the
server, made the request, and got at least an OK response. But how do we
know that the response body contains the correct data?
Decoding the response body
One way would be to compare the contents of resp.Body against the exact
JSON string we expect. That’s not hard to construct, since we know it will
go func() { 
    err := books.ListenAndServe(":3000", catalog) 
    if err != nil { 
        panic(err) 
    } 
}()
resp, err := http.Get("http://localhost:3000/") 
if err != nil { 
    t.Fatal(err) 
} 
defer resp.Body.Close()
if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusOK { 
    t.Fatalf("unexpected status %d", resp.StatusCode) 
}be the JSON equivalent of what GetAllBooks on the test catalog returns.
Something like this:
And so on. We could put this string into the test as a constant, or even save
it to a file, and read the contents of that file in the test. But that sounds a bit
boring, and we’re not really interested in the JSON data as such. What we
care about is the book information that it represents.
Let’s have the test do exactly what the real client will have to do, then:
decode the JSON into Book data. Then we can compare it directly with the
test catalog to make sure it’s correct.
Laziness is a key virtue for any programmer, so we’ll start by asking if we
can just copy any similar code that’s already been written. We know that 
OpenCatalog decodes JSON data, and here’s the relevant snippet:
Nice, but we need to make a slight change for this test, because we’re
expecting a []Book, not a Catalog. Something like this might work, then:
Notice that we’re passing json.NewDecoder the response body here, rather
than a file handle. Remember how we saw earlier in this chapter that lots of
different types implement the io.Reader interface, including files and
response bodies? Well, that’s how NewDecoder works, too: it takes an 
{ 
  { 
    "Title": "In the Company of Cheerful Ladies", 
    ...
catalog := NewCatalog() 
err = json.NewDecoder(file).Decode(&catalog.data)
bookList := []books.Book{} 
err = json.NewDecoder(resp.Body).Decode(&bookList)io.Reader parameter, meaning that we can pass it any reader and it will try
to read JSON from it.
Because that could fail, or the JSON might be invalid, Decode returns an
error, and the test needs to check that, as always. But assuming there’s no
error, then bookList should be exactly the slice of books (in some arbitrary
order) that the test catalog contains. And we already have a test helper to
assert that (how convenient!)
So, here’s the complete test:
assertTestBooks(t, bookList)
func TestServerListsAllBooks(t *testing.T) { 
    t.Parallel() 
    catalog := getTestCatalog() 
    catalog.Path = t.TempDir() + "/catalog" 
    go func() { 
        err := books.ListenAndServe(":3000", catalog) 
        if err != nil { 
            panic(err) 
        } 
    }() 
    resp, err := http.Get("http://localhost:3000/") 
    if err != nil { 
        t.Fatal(err) 
    } 
    defer resp.Body.Close() 
    if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusOK { 
        t.Fatalf("unexpected status %d", resp.StatusCode) 
    } 
    bookList := []books.Book{} 
    err = json.NewDecoder(resp.Body).Decode(&bookList) It looks fairly involved, but we understand all the steps involved, because
we’ve practised them before. Let’s write a dummy implementation of 
ListenAndServe, then, and we’ll make sure the test fails as expected.
A dummy server implementation
Let’s create a new source file for the server-related code. It could perfectly
well live in the books.go file, along with everything else, but it seems tidier
to me to keep it separate. I’m going to create server.go, in the same folder
as books.go, and add this code to it:
Notice that this file declares package books at the top, just as books.go does.
We’re saying that even though this is a different source file, it’s still part of
the same package; that’s what the package clause does.
This ListenAndServe function does absolutely nothing except return nil, so
we feel that the test should run and fail. At least, we hope so, or it would be
a pretty useless test.
But which test failure message will we see? For extra points, see if you can
work this out before running it.
    if err != nil { 
        t.Fatal(err) 
    } 
    assertTestBooks(t, bookList) 
}
package books 
 
func ListenAndServe(addr string, catalog *Catalog) error { 
    return nil 
}I think, since we’re not even running a server yet, that the http.Get request
should fail, since it won’t be able to connect to localhost on port 3000.
Well, here goes:
go test
--- FAIL: TestServerListsAllBooks (0.02s) 
    books_test.go:210: invalid character 'H' looking for beginning 
    of value
That’s strange. This error must be coming from the JSON decoding stage,
which is surprising because we don’t think we served any JSON. Where’s
this mysterious “H” coming from?
One problem is that our test diagnostics aren’t very good. We know that,
whatever data the server sent, it wasn’t valid JSON—but what was it? How
can we get that data, for example to print it out as part of our failure
message?
Unmarshaling JSON from bytes
Well, consider what the JSON decoder does. It reads bytes from the reader
we passed to NewDecoder, which in our case is the resp.Body. But the thing
about a reader is that it’s a one-way stream of bytes: once they’ve been
read, they’re gone. Reading, in other words, consumes the contents of the
reader, and you can’t get them back.
So, by the time we know that the JSON decoder hit an error, the contents of 
resp.Body have been drained, and we no longer have any way to know what
they were. That’s awkward, because it makes it hard to tell exactly what
went wrong.
One solution might be to use io.ReadAll to read the bytes into a slice before
trying to decode them. That way, if we can’t decode them, we still have a
copy of the bytes that we can print. But how do we decode JSON from a
slice of bytes instead of a reader?Fortunately, the json package has a way to do this, using the 
json.Unmarshal function:
(Listing books/19)
We read the contents of resp.Body into the variable data, which is a slice of
bytes. Then we try to decode it into bookList using json.Unmarshal, but if
that fails, we can print data as a string, to see what the bogus JSON actually
was.
“Marshalling”, by the way, is what they do in a railway yard, when they put
together the various different cars and wagons into a single train for
transport, and then unmarshal them at the other end. It’s the same idea here:
the different bits of data in the response are (or will be) marshalled by the
server into a JSON “train”, and unmarshalled in our test.
An unexpected server
Now that we have some better diagnostics, then, let’s run the test again and
see what the bogus response body actually was:
invalid character 'H' looking for beginning of value in "Hello, 
world\n"
It’s coming from inside the house
data, err := io.ReadAll(resp.Body) 
if err != nil { 
    t.Fatal(err) 
} 
err = json.Unmarshal(data, &bookList) 
if err != nil { 
    t.Fatalf("%v in %q", err, data) 
}Well, I wasn’t expecting that! It looks as though, even though we didn’t
start a server in the test, we already have some server listening on port 3000
and serving the message “Hello, world”.
Because of course we do! Remember how I ran the cmd/server program in
a spare terminal earlier, and left it running while we tested the client
program? Oops. It’s still running. Let’s shut that down and try the test
again:
Get "http://localhost:3000/": dial tcp [::1]:3000: connect: 
connection refused
That’s more like it. Now that there’s nothing listening on port 3000, the test
correctly reports that it was unable to connect.
This is the sort of thing that happens all the time when we’re developing
clients and servers. It’s quite possible to write a test that accidentally
succeeds because the real server was running, instead of a test server.
Fortunately, this one failed instead.
It’s fine, though, because it gives us the opportunity to improve our test, by
printing more helpful diagnostics in the case of a failure; we also learned
about the useful json.Unmarshal function.
What can we learn from this? Obviously I should try to remember to shut
down servers after I’m done with them, but is there a more general point to
be made here about testing servers?
Remember how we saw, in a previous chapter, that tests can have
unforeseen side-effects if they accidentally read or write each other’s disk
files? We fixed that issue by giving each test its own unique temporary
directory, using t.TempDir. Could we do something similar in this case?
A unique server
In other words, could we give each test its own unique server? Yes, if we
used different listening ports, we could do exactly that. That way, multipletests wouldn’t interfere with each other by making parallel requests to the
same server.
This is easily done if we use, say, port 3000 for this test, then port 3001 for
the next test, and so on. But it’s a little annoying to have to keep coming up
with new port numbers, and we might easily forget and end up with several
tests trying to run servers on the same port.
It also doesn’t solve the problem of what happens if there’s already some
unrelated server that just happens to be listening on one of the ports we
chose. What we need is a way for each test to get its own unique port
number that we can guarantee is not already in use.
Luckily for us, it turns out that’s something that TCP/IP provides. Port
number 0 is reserved, meaning that no one can listen on it, and most
operating systems treat it as a request for a random free port number.
So, if we change our listen address from :3000 to :0, we should get a server
on some unique port that isn’t already in use, which is just what we wanted.
There’s only one problem: we don’t know which one!
In other words, having started the server, we then want to make an HTTP
request to the server’s address. But, if it’s random, then we can’t predict
what it will be, and there’s no way to ask the server.
In my book The Power of Go: Tests, I share a little trick for this. I use a
helper function that listens on a port directly, using the net.Listen function,
and then returns the actual address of that listener (closing it down in the
process, so that the port becomes free again). Here it is:
func randomLocalAddr(t *testing.T) string { 
    t.Helper() 
    l, err := net.Listen("tcp", ":0") 
    if err != nil { 
        t.Fatal(err) 
    } (Listing books/19)
Serving on a random local address
So, if we borrowed this idea, we could write something like:
In other words, we first of all get the random local address, whatever it
turns out to be, and store it in the addr variable. Then we start our test
server on that address, and make our client request to it using the same
address.
The test still won’t pass, because we still haven’t actually started a server. If
we run it a few times, though, we should see it repeatedly failing to connect,
but each time to a different address. Let’s try:
dial tcp [::]:49575: connect: connection refused 
dial tcp [::]:49614: connect: connection refused 
dial tcp [::]:49631: connect: connection refused 
...
Nice. We now have a way to give each test its own unique server on an
unused address, and to know what that address is. We’re ready to
    defer l.Close() 
    return l.Addr().String() 
}
addr := randomLocalAddr(t) 
go func() { 
    ... 
    err := books.ListenAndServe(addr, catalog) 
    ... 
}() 
resp, err := http.Get("http://" + addr) 
...implement ListenAndServe for real.
Here’s what we know so far
You now understand the basics of TCP/IP, including hosts, ports, and
connections, and you’ve seen how a higher-level protocol such as HTTP
can use TCP connections to serve resources to clients using a request /
response exchange.
You’ve met Go’s very useful http package, and used it to write a pair of
programs implementing a “hello, world” server and client. You know how 
ListenAndServe behaves, and how to write an HTTP handler function,
including how to write data to the client using the ResponseWriter object.
You can use http.Get to make requests, and you know how to check the
response status and read the data from the response body.
You’ve learned how to decode JSON data in responses, either by streaming
directly using NewDecoder, or by reading the bytes first with io.ReadAll, and
then decoding them with Unmarshal.
You’ve also picked up some useful techniques for testing Go servers, such
as starting the server inside a goroutine, and using TCP port 0 to get a
unique, random free port for each test’s instance of the server.